# Akhilananda - Hindu Psychology: Its Meaning for the West (1948)
# source: vivekavani.com | pages: 255 | ~79815 words

HINDU PSYCHOLOGY
Its Meaning for the West
SWAMI AKHILANANDA
Introduction by Gordon W Allport

First published in 1948
by Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2001.
© 1948 Swami Akhilananda
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
The publishers have made every effort to contact authors/copyright holders
of the works reprinted in the International Library of Psychology.
This has not been possible in every case, however, and we would
welcome correspondence from those individuals/companies
we have been unable to trace.
These reprints are taken from original copies of each book. In many cases
the condition of these originals is not perfect. The publisher has gone to
great lengths to ensure the quality of these reprints, but wishes to point
out that certain characteristics of the original copies will, of necessity, be
apparent in reprints thereof.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library
ISBN 0-203-00266-0 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-17319-8 (Glassbook Format)
Hindu Psychology
ISBN 0415-21110-7 (Print Edition)
Psychology and Religion: 6 Volumes
ISBN 0415-21133-6 (Print Edition)
The International Library of Psychology: 204 Volumes
ISBN 0415-19132-7 (Print Edition)

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION by Gordon W. Allport 
ix
FOREWORD by Edgar Sheffield Brightman
 xi
PREFACE
xv
    I.
A SURVEY OF WESTERN AND HINDU PSYCHOLOGY
  1
   II. COGNITION
 21
  III. EMOTION
 37
  IV.
THE SUBCONSCIOUS MIND
 54
   V.
WILL AND PERSONALITY
 78
Will
 78
Suggestion
 88
Hypnosis
 91
Personality
 96
  VI. MEDITATION 
102
 VII. EFFECT OF MEDITATION 
126
VIII. INTUITIVE INSIGHT 
135
  IX. EXTRASENSORY EXPERIENCES 
142
   X. THE SUPERCONSCIOUS STATE 
150
  XI. METHODS OF SUPERCONSCIOUS EXPERIENCE 
171
 XII. CAN SUPERCONSCIOUS KNOWLEDGE BE IMPARTED? 
190
XIII. RELIGION AND PSYCHOTHERAPY
199
XIV. PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE
209
APPENDIX
225
BIBLIOGRAPHY
229
INDEX
233

ix
Introduction
IT IS inexcusable that we who think in the Western frame of thought
should be as ignorant as we are of the frame of thought of the East.
Year after year we have spent our time thinking exclusively in the
thought forms of our own Western culture, in practicing or examining
the tradition of our own religion, and in evolving our own Western
theories of the mind. Few of us have spent even one day of our
lives learning about the thought forms that control the minds of
millions of our fellow men who adhere to the basic religion of
Hinduism. Since in modern days we can no longer deny that all
mankind lives in One World, such ignorance of our Eastern cousin’s
mind is as dangerous as it is inexcusable.
Does the excited psychology of action and behavior so
characteristic of America treat adequately all the capacities of the
human mind? Are the powers of meditation revealed through yoga
illusory and slightly absurd? Is it conceivable that the energies
released through mental discipline are of no potential use to men
who live in the West? Ignorance of Eastern thought leads us to give
callow and mischievous answers to such questions as these.
Swami Akhilananda makes available to us a nontechnical
introduction to the thought of the East. He does so in a direct and
lucid style. Understanding and appreciating the significance of much
of Western psychology, he is able to point shrewdly to certain
improvements that Eastern psychology can offer, and to chasms it
may help to fill. At the same time he stresses in a manner agreeable
B

x
INTRODUCTION
to Americans the applications of Hindu psychology. In this respect
he shows that he sympathizes with the pragmatic interest of
Americans. He is an architect bent on building a bridge between
hemispheres.
I do not mean to say that complete co-ordination between Hindu
and American psychology will be easily achieved. In some respects,
I am convinced, American psychology would improve in richness
and wisdom if it accommodated in some way the wise things that
the author says about meditation and the necessity for an adequate
philosophy of life. In respect to the more occult manifestations of
mental powers to which he occasionally refers, I am not so certain.
Whether the occult element in Hindu psychology stems from its
relative lack of acquaintance with what we in the West call “scientific
method,” or whether this Western “scientific method” is nothing
but a narrow cult that blinds itself to uncongenial phenomena, I am
not at this moment prepared to say. Perhaps concessions are needed
on both sides.
But the problem of the occult plays a minor role in this book.
From the author I have learned, as others will, many basic facts
about the thought forms of the Hindu religion and the Hindu direction
of mental life. Such knowledge is intrinsically rewarding. It is also
timely since it helps build for the coming era needed bridges between
great families of the human race.
GORDON W. ALLPORT
Psychology Department
Harvard University   

xi
Foreword
ALL too many there are who quote Rudyard Kipling’s famous lines
(often stopping with the first line):
Oh, East is East, and West is West, and never the
twain shall meet.
Till Earth and Sky stand presently at God’s great
Judgment Seat.
All too few remember how Kipling continued:
But there is neither East nor West, Border, nor
Breed, nor Birth,
When two strong men stand face to face, though
they come from the ends of the earth!
The spirit can triumph over geography and race. Kipling’s restriction
of the spirit of universality to “strong men” is, we must grant, too
individualistic, too aristocratic and Nietzschean to lead the world on
the path to spiritual unity. Yet humanity has a long way to go before
it fulfills Kipling’s vision of “neither East nor West, Border, nor Breed,
nor Birth.”
Too many Occidentals judge the East entirely in terms of its economic
poverty, human suffering, caste distinctions, and social
maladjustments. Too many Orientals judge the West entirely in terms
of its exploitation of less favored races, its materialistic love of profit
and comfort, its disloyalty to religion, and its ruthless and suicidal

xii
FOREWORD
warfare. All races and regions will be condemned when only their
weaknesses and sins are considered. All races and regions will be
appreciated when their highest achievements and possibilities are
taken into account.
It is fortunate for the United States that so many worthy
representatives of other cultures come to live in this country and to
share their thought with Americans. Notable among these valued
guests is the Swami Akhilananda, who for some years has been
conducting worship and instruction in the Ramakrishna Vedanta
Centers of Providence, Rhode Island, and Boston, Massachusetts.
He has made many friends in educational circles, especially at
Brown, Boston, and Harvard Universities. He is welcome among
Jews and Christians alike. He is prized both as a scholar and as a
religious leader and counselor.
It is a great privilege for me to be counted among the friends of
this broad-minded and noble man. He is modest, gentle, and tolerant;
yet at the same time firm, well-poised, and saintly. In this book he
has set forth some of the psychological principles of the art of living.
The reader may be assured that the Swami lives by the principles
which he here recommends to others. He may also be assured that
the purpose of this book is not to lead him to substitute Indian
psychology for Christianity or Judaism. The Swami esteems these
religions highly. Not only does his Vedanta faith forbid him to speak
evil of any religion, but also it leads him to acknowledge the presence
of divine reality in every religion. The principles which the Swami
Akhilananda sets forth in this book are universal, not sectarian.
They are based on the results of centuries of experience and spiritual
experiment as truly as science is based on the work of centuries of
physical experiment.
There is a sense in which his insights represent both the oldest
and the youngest Hindu wisdom. The oldest, because all Indian
devotees are students of the ancient scriptures of the Vedas and

xiii
FOREWORD
Upanishads, and of commentators and philosophers who have
interpreted the spiritual principles of Hinduism; and the youngest,
because the faith which he represents is an outgrowth of the teaching
and religious experience of Sri Ramakrishna, a nineteenth-century
saint, whose immediate disciple, the Swami Brahmananda, was the
teacher of the Swami Akhilananda. To know our author, then, is
analogous to knowing one of the early Christians who was separated
from Jesus by only one generation.
These facts may serve to explain the combination of maturity
and vitality, of theoretical insight and practical sense, which one
finds in this book. The reader may approach it with any faith or
with no faith. Let him read it with open mind. Few indeed will be
those who study it and try even a few of its suggestions without
experiencing some new calm, peace, and strength in the inner life.
East and West need each other. Each is richer in some goods,
poorer in others. The West cannot afford to neglect the gifts which
wise men from the East may bring.
EDGAR SHEFFIELD BRIGHTMAN
Philosophy Department
Boston University

xv
Preface
THE various chapters of this book were originally given as
extemporaneous lectures in Boston and Providence. Some friends
were anxious to have a record of these lectures and employed
stenographers to take notes on them. At that time it was not definitely
known whether they would form the chapters of a book or not.
However, as the lectures were received enthusiastically by the
audiences, our friends were anxious to have a permanent record.
Our late friend, Dr. Raymond Willoughby, formerly of Brown
University, attended some of the lectures and read the notes. He
told us: “You [Hindus] have something to give us for the training of
the mind.” So the lectures were edited and elaborated for publication
in book form.
Historical treatment of the development of the science of
psychology in India has not been attempted. This book rather gives
an idea of the achievement of the science of psychology by both
Hindus and Buddhists in India. It also offers the methods that are
adopted in India to develop the mind itself. It may seem that more
elaborate treatment and historical development should be given in a
book on Hindu psychology, as there is no work on this subject so far
as we know.
This book is presented to both Eastern and Western readers to
stimulate their interest in the achievements of the Hindus in the

xvi
PREFACE
science of psychology. It is given in brief form, as the majority of
the people are too busy to spend much of their time in reading. Our
suggestion to Eastern scholars is that they be prepared to share
their knowledge with Western thinkers and readers. They should
contribute unhesitatingly and unsparingly what they can give to the
West in the fields of religion, psychology, and philosophy. On the
other hand, they should be prepared to receive what the West can
contribute in the field of science and other forms of discipline. Our
request to Western readers and thinkers is that they use the
achievements of India in the field of psychology. It will be extremely
gratifying if interest can be created in the readers so that they will
further study and practice the Hindu system of psychology. Their
efforts will considerably lessen mutual mistrust, suspicion, and
misunderstanding and will bring a great deal of benefit to all groups
of people in the world.
It should be mentioned that Hindu psychology includes both Hindu
and Buddhistic systems of thought and methods of psychology. They
have comingled so much in India ever since the fifth century B.C.
that it would be impossible to separate them. Both Hindu and
Buddhistic psychologists use many methods in common for mental
development.
Often Western thinkers consider Hindu philosophy and psychology
something mysterious; consequently, they almost neglect to mention
it in their historic treatment of these branches of knowledge. It is
our conviction that this is due to the Western scholars’ lack of
knowledge of the Hindu schools of thought. Unfortunately, the word
yoga almost invariably arouses curiosity and suspicion in the West.
We have tried to dispel the confused notions of Western readers.

xvii
PREFACE
Hindu psychology and the systems of yoga are neither mysterious,
suspicious, nor amusing. They are based on thorough scientific
methods of observation and experiment.
The first two chapters of this book may seem to be technical and
uninteresting from the “pragmatic” point of view. It was necessary
to give a complete picture of the mind as conceived by Hindu
psychologists, so we had to run the risk of making the treatment a
little technical as a basis for the understanding of perception and
knowledge. Therefore, readers are requested to continue with
patience until they reach the practical aspects of Hindu psychology
and its value in life.
The credit for this book goes completely to the teachings, love,
blessings, and inspiration of our beloved Master, Swami
Brahmananda, and to our beloved leader, Swami Vivekananda, two
great disciples of Sri Ramakrishna. We must mention the name of
Swami Premananda, another great disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, who
is considerably responsible for our humble contribution, as he used
to insist on our study of scientific methods. We are also humbly
grateful to other disciples of Sri Ramakrishna for their ideals and
lives and for their loving blessings to us.
The manuscript was read wholly or partly by all the Swamis of
the Ramakrishna Order in America. Swami Bodhananda of New
York, Swami Prabhavananda of Los Angeles, and Swami
Vishwananda of Chicago should be especially mentioned for their
constant encouragement. Our good friends Professor Edgar S.
Brightman of Boston University, Professor Gordon W. Allport of
Harvard University, Professor Paul E. Johnson of Boston University,
Professor Joachim Wach of Brown University, Professor Parry
B*

xviii
PREFACE
Moon of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Professor
Orval Hobart Mowrer of Harvard University kindly read the
manuscript and gave valuable suggestions. We are especially grateful
to Professor Brightman and Professor Allport for writing the
Foreword and Introduction as well as for their interest in the
publication of the book. We are also indebted to some of our students
and friends who arranged for stenographers, typed the manuscript,
and helped in other ways. We also thankfully acknowledge the authors
and publishers who kindly and graciously permitted their books to
be quoted.
We offer the result of this humble effort to the All Loving Being.
AKHILANANDA
Vedanta Society
Boston, Massachusetts
November 12, 1945

HINDU PSYCHOLOGY
I T S M E A N I N G
FOR THE WEST

1
C H A P T E R I
A Survey of Western and Hindu Psychology
Y
EARS ago, the psychology of the classical schools in the West
was concerned chiefly with the study of the mind in its
successive states of awareness. The older psychologists described
the functionings of the mind, observed how it behaved, and then
tried to discover the laws that governed its activities. However,
these studies were always limited to the conscious plane. We seldom
find any reference to the study of other mental aspects. Even the
great psychologist, Wundt, as well as other notable persons in the
field, seemed unaware of the activities of the hidden states of mind
now known as the subconscious or unconscious. Although
psychologists formed different schools of thought according to their
various theories of the subjective and objective elements of
consciousness and the relation of these elements to the physical
body, they all studied the conscious elements only, ignoring the
subconscious and superconscious states of mind. From their
observations, many of them came to the conclusion that
consciousness and soul had no existence separate from physical
brain matter and that they were really only products of brain matter.
Materialistic thinkers completely ignored the fact that there could
be a separate existence of mind or consciousness, to say nothing of
a separate existence of the soul, although Wundt and his followers
expounded psychophysical parallelism.

2
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
It is true that the mind usually functions in ordinary persons
through the nervous system and brain cells, just as electricity functions
and is manifested through wires and electrical apparatus.1 Yet one
cannot conclude that the electricity and the wires are identical.
Similarly, the mind in its functionings, conscious or otherwise, cannot
be identified with the instruments through which it works or has
expression.
The trend of modern science, however, is in a direction different
from that taken by the materialists of the last century. Some of the
modern scientists, unlike their predecessors, are not dogmatic in
their views. We do not wish to imply that the psychologists of the
older schools of thought were the only ones to put forth their ideas
as ultimate solutions. Physicists, chemists, and general scientists
were also dogmatic and tenacious in their opinions. Today it is a
pleasure to find that some of the greatest thinkers, some of the
most notable psychologists, are taking a liberal stand. They do not
limit themselves to one aspect of a subject but are ready to regard
it from other points of view, always keeping themselves open to
conviction. Many of them are willing to concede that the mind may
continue to exist after the dissolution of the body and brain. Dr.
William Brown, one of the outstanding psychologists and psychiatrists
of Europe, is much inclined to accept the theory of the post-existence
of the mind. The evidence which he himself has gathered, and which
was obtained for him from authoritative sources upon which he
could depend, has convinced him that there is a strong possibility of
the continued existence of the mind after the death of the physical
body. He says:
It would not be easy to define the scope of psychical research,
but we may perhaps state as its most characteristic problem . . .
how far the embodied mind can get into communication with
1 In Chapters IX and X we shall see, in the cases of extrasensory perceptions and
superconsciousness which are cited, that the mind can function without the help of
the nervous system as an instrument of perception.

3
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
disembodied minds, the minds of those who have already died, the
minds that are to be presumed, either on the authority of religion or
on the basis of fact, to be still existing elsewhere than in visible
human form on this planet.2
Professor Eddington says in his discussion of science and
mysticism:
We have seen that the cyclic scheme of physics presupposes a
background outside the scope of its investigations. In this background
we must find first, our own personality, and then perhaps a greater
personality. The idea of a universal Mind or Logos would be, I
think, a fairly plausible inference from the present state of scientific
theory, at least it is in harmony with it.3
Again, Dr. Richard Müller-Freienfels of Germany, in Evolution
of Modern Psychology, does not discard certain mental
experiences which have no sense element in them, but he suggests
that they be subjected to scientific investigation.4 Such frank
statements coming from psychologists and other scientists clearly
show a definite tendency to differ from and even to refute the
theories of the materialists of the last century. The opinions of
Professor Gordon W. Allport, Sir Oliver Lodge, Dr. Alexis Carrel,
and Dr. Gustaf Stromberg, author of The Soul of the Universe,5
are also included with this group of thinkers.
It is interesting to note that psychology itself is no longer limited
to the study of the conscious mental plane, and careful analyses of
the activities of the subconscious state are being made. This alone
is a wonderful achievement and a great advance in the field of
2 William Brown, Science and Personality (Oxford University Press. 1929). p.
183.
3 A. S. Eddington, Nature of the Physical World (Cambridge University Press,
1928), p. 338.
4 Richard Müller-Freienfels, Evolution of Modern Psychology, trans. W. Béran
Wolfe (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1935).
5 Gustaf Stromberg, The Soul of the Universe (Philadelphia: David McKay Co.,
1940).

4
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
mental science. Of course, exceptions to this are found in the
behaviorists, reflexologists, and other mechanistic psychologists who
reject not only the subconscious but also the conscious states. Even
these thinkers by their denials show that these mental states cannot
be ignored and that there are certain phenomena which must be
satisfactorily explained somehow if we are to understand the human
personality.
Psychoanalysis has made amazing strides in this modern age.
The experiments performed and the evidence gathered are really
surprising. In their attempts to obtain a clear understanding of the
activities that are going on beneath the surface of the conscious
plane, psychologists are making definite and deliberate experiments
upon the hidden mind. They are analyzing carefully the different
psychological states and mental functionings. This is difficult because
they are dealing with subtle and elusive mental forces that cannot
be easily apprehended. These forces are often not reducible to
scientific formulas nor subject to conclusive proof. Anyone can study
or observe certain psychological states and processes that are going
on in the conscious plane, but it requires penetrating analytical
intelligence, intuitive insight, clarity of vision, and the utmost patience
to try to grasp the functionings of the hidden states of the
subconscious aspect of the mind. Often one has only inference
upon which to depend. People behave in certain ways; they have
certain reactions. From observation of their conduct and study of
their habits the psychoanalyst tries to discover the root from which
their actions spring—the motivating cause of their behavior. This is
to be found within the subconscious mind.
Nowadays, most of the dynamic psychologists of the West —
except, of course, the behaviorists and others of similar type—
believe that man’s behavior and many of his conscious activities

5
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
are really determined by the subconscious mind. For instance, if
you have any kind of fear they will not leave you alone until they
have discovered the underlying cause. They want to know why
you have that fear and what is in your subconscious state that
produces it. Similarly, they will analyze other tendencies, too, until
they are satisfied that they have found the root of the mental difficulty
and can explain why you are reacting in this or that manner.
According to Freud, Jung, and others, the greater portion of the
mind is actually submerged, unknown to every one of us. Hindus
agree with them in this respect. The mind can be compared to an
iceberg. Although only a small portion is visible above the water,
nevertheless the submerged part of it exists and is a power to be
reckoned with. From the surface of the water one cannot easily
gauge the size of the whole iceberg, yet it may be powerful enough
to destroy a huge ship such as the ill-fated “Titanic.” Similarly, the
submerged mind, the subconscious state, is a potent factor and
powerful enough to determine even conscious tendencies. Often
we do not realize what influences are hidden there. A man may not
be aware of the forces that lie beneath the surface of his mind, nor
can these forces be suspected by an untrained observer. Hindu
psychologists call these hidden mental forces samskaras.6
Modern psychology has developed another aspect of the study
of the mind that is a unique contribution to the Western world,
especially to medical science. The greater number of our diseases
are now believed to be functional and caused by maladjustment,
conflict, frustration, or lack of mental balance with consequent
disorder of the nervous system. This may be a surprise to many
persons. How can this be? How can the mind and nerves affect
the body in such a way as to cause organic disease?
6 Raja Yoga by Swami Vivekananda and the Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali are
recommended for further study of the Hindu point of view.

6
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
When the nerves do not function properly, ailments appear in
certain organs. Psychologists tell us that many of the so-called
organic diseases had their beginning when the organs could not
function properly owing to mental maladjustments, conflict, and
consequent lack of balance in the nervous system. We all know
that the nervous system plays a vital and most important part in our
lives. It is closely connected with the mind and is easily affected by
the slightest mental disorder. Therefore, mental troubles which are
reflected in the nervous system can be shown as the real cause of
many functional diseases. Also many cases of insanity, neuroses
and psychoses, can be traced to mental dissatisfaction and agitation,
frustration and conflict.
A few years ago at an annual conference regarding medical
education, eminent medical men expressed their strong belief that
students of medicine should study psychiatry and that the degree of
Doctor of Medicine should include requirements for an understanding
of analytical psychology.7 This shows definitely that modern medical
science is taking into consideration the mental condition of a patient,
and significance is being given to the effect of the mind on the
body. Psychosomatic treatment is advocated by Dr. Franz Alexander
in The Medical Value of Psychoanalysis.8 This book and Dr. Carl
7 “ The Importance of Introducing Psychiatry into General Internship,” Journal
of the American Medical Association, CII (1934), 982-86 and 1231-32. The late
Dean A. S. Begg of Boston University introduced the study of the nervous system in
the first year of medical school, followed by physiology and its bearing on the nervous
system. In the second year, neuropathology and psychiatric principles were introduced.
According to Dr. E. S. Ryerson of Toronto University, the study of psychology was
compulsory in the second year of medical school. Dr. C. C. Burlingame of Hartford,
Connecticut, and Dr. Franklin Ebaugh recommended a knowledge of fundamental
psychiatry during internship.
8 Franz Alexander, The Medical Value of Psychoanalysis (London: Allen and Unwin,
1936), chaps. V and VI.

7
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
Binger’s The Doctor’s Job are very helpful for reference.9
The motivating forces behind man’s activities are being seriously
studied by modern psychologists, but there are points of difference
between the Eastern and Western schools of thought. The Hindu
psychologists agree that man has various urges and instincts, but
they do not accept the theories of Freud and Adler that either the
sex urge or the will to power is the most predominant instinct or
that it is the fundamental truth of man’s nature. In this connection,
the ideas of Dr. William Brown resemble those of the Hindu
psychologists because he holds that neither sex nor the will to power
is enough to explain human behavior and action. Dr. Brown also
comments, in Science and Personality, that although Freud and
Adler tried to discover one predominant instinct in man they have
failed.
Freud later seemed to change from his theory of one basic urge
of sex (pleasure) to a theory of two basic urges—“life instinct” and
“death instinct,” or sex urge and suicide urge. He evidently concluded
that these two are not mutually exclusive urges in man; they
intermingle in human behavior. According to him and some of his
followers, such as Dr. Karl A. Menninger, author of Man Against
Himself,10 life is a struggle between these two forces.
Hindu psychologists do not agree with the view that man has a
basic destructive tendency. Suicide, war, and all other such
destructive tendencies are not expressions of the normal mind. It
seems that Freud and other psychoanalysts make unnecessary and
uncalled-for generalizations from the study of pathological cases. It
is also equally illogical and superficial to trace the death or destructive
urge even in religious self-abnegation and sacrifice. An unbiased
9 Carl Binger, The Doctor’s Job (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., Inc., 1945),
chap. VIII.
10 Karl A. Menninger, Man Against Himself (London: Harrap, 1938).

8
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
understanding of the true spirit of religious culture will convince us
that Freudian conclusions of this sort are thoroughly unjustified.
The view of the Hindu psychologists is just the opposite. They come
to the conclusion that there is an urge for eternal happiness and
eternal existence in the human mind. The search after abiding
happiness, bliss, is the real motive power behind man’s activities
both conscious and unconscious, as Spinoza affirmed. The tendency
to destruction, or the suicide urge, is not the basic and inherent
quality of man; hatred, war, and other destructive activities are rather
due to the perverted application and erroneous understanding of
this urge for happiness.
Dr. William McDougall also differs from the Freudian and Adlerian
schools in his interpretation of the motivating force behind man’s
activities. He cannot accept either the sex impulse or the will to
power as the whole urge, although he definitely believes that the
conscious and subconscious activities of man are purposeful. In
other words, he concludes that there is a purpose behind all
consciousness. He seeks a “master urge” to explain the purpose of
man’s different instinctive functioning, but unfortunately, he does
not give the definite or specific nature of that master urge.
Gestalt psychology, of which Dr. Wolfgang Köhler is the most
prominent exponent, is seeking a “totality” of conscious experience.
According to this school, the conscious self is a unity and not a
combination or sum total of separate instincts and perceptions. The
Gestalt psychologists, however, do not as yet give us a complete
explanation of this “total” mind—the conscious, subconscious, and
superconscious.
We can safely say that there is a general tendency among modern
psychiatrists to think that all conscious and subconscious activities
of men’s minds function purposively and that they are controlled by
a unifying principle. There must be a purpose or a reason for the

9
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
behavior of a man. On the other hand, those of the behaviorist
school claim that man is practically a machine and that consciousness
itself is only an illusion. These thinkers criticize not only Freud and
Jung for their study of the unconscious state of mind but all who
believe in the existence of the consciousness of man, not to speak
of the existence of God. To a behaviorist God is only an illusion
created by the “laziness of mankind.” To quote John B. Watson:
In the larger group God or Jehovah takes the place of the family
father. Thus even the modern child from the beginning is confronted
by the dicta of medicine men—be they the father, the soothsayer of
the village, the God, or Jehovah. Having been brought up in this
attitude towards authority, he never questions the concepts imposed
upon him.11
Behaviorists will tell us to study a man’s physical make-up if we
would understand his behavior. Of course, the psychoanalysts, as
well as the Hindu psychologists, admit that there is a great change
in the physical state when there is a change in the mind and vice
versa. When the mind is affected, there will be a change in the
body. But there are still many questions which the behaviorists have
yet to answer adequately or satisfactorily. They cannot fully explain
many of the cases of psychosis and neurosis by tracing the causes
in the structure of the nerves and nerve centers, although it is true
that some of the dementia praecox and other cases are cured by
insulin, other drugs, and shock treatment. However, in spite of the
physiological experiments of these schools, their conclusions are
incomplete, for they do not explain the extrasensory perceptions
and superconscious states of mind.
The mechanistic schools have exaggerated their claims for their
view of the mechanical nature of the mind. According to them,
11 John B. Watson, Behaviorism (London: Kegan Paul, 1924), p. 4.

10
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
mind is a complex mechanism like a modern linotype, or some other
complicated printing machine, which does all the work of a number
of men. But we do not find any real explanation of human behavior
under extremely complicated and unknown environments and
situations. The mechanical view does not give initiative and dynamic
resourcefulness to the mechanical mind. In the observation of human
behavior we fail to find any purposive ingenuity of the unfathomable
mind which can be converted into mere functions of material cells
or nerve cells. Mechanistic behaviorism cannot explain the various
higher mental faculties or human functions, such as love and
sympathy, not to speak of the higher values and spiritual qualities
which operate in elevated stages of human society.
On the other hand, the purposivists or hormic psychologists, like
Professor McDougall, want to avoid some of the limitations of
behaviorism and functionalism by endowing consciousness with
purposive faculties. The driving forces are innate in the mind in the
form of instincts and urges. Man strives to overcome difficulties
and to be master of the situation. Purposivists can better explain
complicated human nature although they also fall short of total
understanding of human experiences. The same can be said of
Gestaltists.
It should be noted here that great emphasis is given to “action” in
most of the schools of psychology in America. We may safely say
that the major trend in American psychology is in the motor aspect
of mind. Professor William James can be regarded as the founder
of “action psychology” in this country, although Bain and Darwin
were the forerunners. According to James “all consciousness is
motor.” Münsterberg and Dewey became the great exponents of
the school of thought which emphasized activity, achievement, and
conduct. The pragmatism of James was greedily taken up by Dewey
and others in the field of psychology. As a result we find that the
development of mind is measured by its outer expressions and

11
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
achievements in the objective sense. The quality of intelligence is
determined by the measurement of ability in action. Consequently,
the subjective element of mind is ignored. In fact, meditation and
inner understanding are generally neglected. Professor Gordon
Allport of Harvard University gave a beautiful summary of the
specialty of American psychology in his speech as chairman of the
Society for Psychological Study of Social Issues. He said: “The
genius of American psychology lies in its stress upon action or, in
slightly dated terminology, upon the motor phase of reflex arc.”
Again he said: “We seldom record, for example, an individual’s unique
and subjective pattern of thought life.”12 This tendency of American
psychology is easily understood when we consider the major trends
of American life and its outlook. The hedonistic outlook on life
naturally affects all spheres of activity in a nation. We shall see
later that Hindu psychology has quite a different emphasis, as it
flourished in a nation where the subjective elements of mind and
unique inner mental states play a great part. In fact, spiritual idealism
is the most dominant factor in Hindu national life. In his evaluation
of American psychology Professor Allport is most accurate.
According to the Hindu psychological schools, the greatest
expression of mind lies in its total illumination, which is achieved, as
we shall see, by the subjective methods of concentration and
meditation and consequent mental integration. The mind must be
synthesized in order for a person to achieve real success. Greatness
of mind can be judged not by its ability in action but rather by its
integration and unification.
Hindu psychologists recognize four states of consciousness. To
use the terminology of some of them, one can say that they believe
12 Gordon W. Allport, “The Psychology of Participation,” The Psychological
Review, LII (May, 1945), 117-31

12
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
in the sleeping, dreaming, awakened states, and the
superconscious—susupti, swapna, jagrat, and turiya. The sleeping
and dreaming states are included in the subconscious. So, according
to Western terminology, this amounts to three states—subconscious,
conscious, and superconscious. The study of the superconscious is
either ignored or considered pathological by most Western
psychologists, although Professor William James studied the
manifestations of it in his book, Varieties of Religious
Experiences,13 and Dr. Müller-Freienfels gives hints of mental
telepathy and other such unusual mental phenomena in his treatment
of parapsychology in Evolution of Modern Psychology.14 It is
also encouraging to note that Professor Rhine of Duke University
has made a careful study of what he calls “extrasensory perceptions”
in his book, New Frontiers of the Mind,15 to see if he can reach a
scientific explanation of certain mental perceptions that are received
independently of the sense organs and nervous system.
Although telepathy and clairvoyance seem to be expressions of
extrasensory powers, they are not to be confused with the
superconscious state or samadhi. In fact, the exercise of these
extraordinary powers is considered as an obstacle to the attainment
of superconscious realization. This is emphasized in the Yoga
Aphorisms of Patanjali and the Teachings of Sri Ramakrishna.
However, Patanjali (the father of Hindu psychology) and others
recognize these perceptions and even give the methods by which
one can develop them although they discourage the use of them if
one would attain to true spirituality. Sometimes telepathy,
clairvoyance, and other similar powers are manifested in persons
without any conscious effort on their part; sometimes they are
13 William James, Varieties of Religious Experiences (London: Longmans, 1929).
14 Müller-Freienfels, Evolution of Modern Psychology, pp. 469-78.
15 Joseph Banks Rhine, New Frontiers of the Mind (London: Faber, 1937).

13
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
manifested in the course of the true practice of yoga and the right
type of concentration and meditation; but they are powers in the
worldly sense, and the real seeker after truth is warned not to let
them draw him from his goal. In Hindu psychology and other such
systems a thorough study has been made of the various stages of
superconscious realization and other extrasensory perceptions
through Raja Yoga practices as given in the Yoga Aphorisms of
Patanjali. Certain types of lower extrasensory perceptions are
discussed in books on Hatha Yoga; but we do not propose to describe
Hatha Yoga, as it is meant primarily for the control of physical
laws.
It is of fundamental importance to note that there are distinct
differences between the experimental and inferential methods of
the Western psychologists and the subjective and intuitive yoga
practices (mental science or psychology) of the Hindus.16 The purely
objective method cannot be adequately applied to the study of the
mind. The psychologist has to interpret the normal and abnormal
outer expressions in order to understand the inner states and urges
of the mind. He inevitably colors the interpretations by his
preconceived notions. Apart from that, a particular expression may
have different causes. There is a popular saying that a fool laughs
three times over a joke. He laughs first when he sees others laughing;
again he laughs when he understands it; and then he laughs thinking
what a fool he was not to understand the joke in the first place. As
laughter was created by three different causes, so an external
expression can be caused by different inner emotions and urges.
Consequently, the interpretive method can hardly give convincing
understanding of the inner nature of the mind, as neuroses and
psychoses may be created in various persons by different
subconscious and conscious urges and mental conditions. Therefore,
the Hindus have devoted themselves thoroughly to the subjective
16 Yoga will be discussed elaborately in Chapter XI, “ Methods of Superconscious
Experience.”

14
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
methods of psychology which give a clear and conclusive
understanding of the total mind.
Western thinkers may be inclined to question the validity of
psychological study in India, as they may find that Hindu psychology
is not experimental in the sense of the Western schools of
experimental psychology. Nevertheless, it can never be said that
Hindu psychology is not empirical, for it is based on the study of the
experience of the mind. Brentano and a number of others of his
school did not ascribe much value to modern experimental
psychology, although empirical psychology was considered by them
to be extremely valuable because they were interested in the nature
of the mind. Professor Boring evidently does not esteem Brentano
highly as a psychologist, as he considers him and his followers to be
philosophers whose major interest was in the understanding of the
whole.17 Such historians and others may find it difficult to appreciate
the contributions of Hindu psychology, and they may dismiss the
whole system as a philosophical treatise or as mystical literature. It
would be unfair to come to such a conclusion, as Hindu psychology
gives definite methods not only for knowing the nature of the mind
but also for developing its powers. Occidental psychological methods
are not the only way of knowing the mind.
We should clearly understand what is meant by the subjective
and intuitive method of Hindu psychology. It does not mean
philosophizing about the nature of the mind or having a conceptual
knowledge thereof, but rather training the total mind of the individual,
including thought, emotion, and will. It does not depend on the
interpretive method, as interpretation of the outer expressions of
the mind may not always be reliable. Hindu psychologists firmly
17 Edwin G. Boring, A History of Experimental Psychology (London: Appleton,
1929), p. 349.

15
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
believe that psychological facts and development can be verified
and developed through personal mental growth. A sincere follower
of the methods of psychological development can achieve unique
growth and can verify the principles discovered through the
experiences of many persons. As they believe in the verifiability of
different mental experiences, Hindu psychologists, although
subjective and intuitive, are scientific as well as practical and
dynamic.
Psychology in the West is now regarded as dynamic by many
outstanding psychologists. It is our opinion that Hindu psychology is
more dynamic, as it trains the individual mind to manifest all its
latent powers. We will see in the chapters on “Meditation” and
“Methods of Superconscious Experience” that through systematic
psychological practices the dynamic powers of mind evolve and
make an individual mind powerful enough to be of service to others
in integrating their emotions and other mental processes.
Hindu psychologists are primarily interested in the study and
development of the total mind rather than in the different functions
considered separately. The experimental psychologists of the West
are interested in the particular phases of mental activity. Some of
them go to an extreme in their specialization when they study only
nerve reactions and think that they will be able to comprehend the
mind itself while they study merely the instruments of the mind. It is
interesting to note what Professor Hocking rightly says in his
evaluation of Western psychology: “But the extant science or
sciences of mind have presented us not the mind itself, but substitutes
for mind, . . .—Near-minds, we may call them.”18 And again he
says: “The several Near-minds of the scientific psychology have
18 W. E. Hocking, “ Mind and Near Mind,” Proceedings of the Sixth International
Congress of Philosophy. ed. Edgar Sheffield Brightman (London: Longmans, 1927),
p. 203.

16
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
their worth and their actuality; but they have life only as organs of
mind.”19 It will not be out of place to remember here that Hindus
accept the existence of mind apart from and independent of the
nerves. Brentano and the Gestaltists are no doubt interested to a
great extent in the total experience of the mind, but they do not
seem to go far enough to cover the whole range of mental
experiences, as we have said already, for they never consider the
superconscious. The psychologists of the unconscious—Freud, Adler,
Jung, and others—also fall short, as we have seen. We make bold
to say that the Western psychologists are mostly concerned with
the different phases of mental functioning by taking them separately
and individually in their experimental methods, while Hindu
psychologists are primarily interested in the study of the total mind,
as they feel that the different functions—consciousness,
unconsciousness, superconsciousness, cognition, volition, and
conation—cannot be really separated. Moreover, they are
interrelated. As we know, any thought creates an emotional reaction
resulting in activity. A thought or a concept creates an emotion within,
such as attraction or repulsion, pleasure or displeasure, love or
hatred. We are also aware of our emotions; as such, thought and
emotion cannot be isolated and observed separately. Emotional urges
make the mind active. It is almost impossible to observe activity of
the mind (function of will) as separate from either thought or emotion.
Nor can we observe a thought as separate from emotion or activity
of the mind. Neither can emotions be isolated from the knowledge
content of the mind and its dynamic expression, however subtle
they may be. Thought, emotion, and will are inseparably connected.
That is the reason Hindu psychologists study these functions together
when they try to develop and integrate the mind. Then again, they
consider that the fullest development of mind can be achieved only
19 Ibid., p. 215.

17
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
when it reaches the superconscious. A student of psychology also
has knowledge of the contents of the unconscious (samaskaras) in
the process of the development of the superconscious. In fact, a
study of the unconscious when isolated from conscious training of
the mind is extremely unsafe, as we shall discuss in the chapter on
the Subconscious Mind. So according to Hindu psychologists, one
cannot really study and know one state of mind properly without
total integration of the mind.
Most of the American psychologists seem to give extreme
emphasis to the motor aspect of the mind. In other words, their
chief interest is to know the activity, the motor consequences of
mental life, in order to find out how the mind acts and reacts from
the motor point of view. On the other hand, Hindu psychologists try
to understand and strengthen the whole mind. Therefore, they are
especially interested in the development of character and personality,
which can be achieved only by integration of the mind. We appreciate
some of the Western psychologists like Professor Allport and
Professor Allers who are interested in the total personality of man.20
It should be mentioned that we do not minimize the importance
of a great number of psychologists in India who taught psychological
principles before the time of Patanjali (about 150 B.C.). Applied
psychology was taught in the Upanishads, the Bhagavad-Gita,
and the Sankhya system. The Buddhists also gave many definite
and practical ideas of applied psychology for the unification and
strengthening of the mind, as well as definite instructions for the
total enlightenment of the mind. In fact, Patanjali gives a systematic
treatise on yoga, though many of his concepts are based on Sankhya
thought.
20 Gordon W. Allport, Personality, A Psychological Interpretation (London:
Constable, 1937); and Rudolph Allers. The Psychology of Character (New York:
Sheed & Ward, 1943).

18
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Hindus have developed their psychology mainly in the course of
religious unfoldment. The Western psychoanalysts —Charcot, Janêt,
Freud, Adler, Jung, and others—began their research in the abnormal
states of the mind. The physiological psychologists are more
interested in the study of the nerve reactions and functionings of
the nervous system than in the mind itself. Professor Hocking of
Harvard University aptly calls this a study of the “near-mind.” It
should be remembered that it is extremely unsafe, to say the least,
to generalize the findings from the study of the abnormal mind and
apply them to fairly normal minds. Freud and others make superficial
remarks about the religious tendencies of man in terms of sex, and
they try to find the “death” or “destructive” tendencies even in
normal and supernormal minds. Actually, the supernormal minds
function in a manner quite different from normal and abnormal cases.
This is the reason that the unfortunate generalizations of many of
the psychotherapeutists regarding spiritual experiences are extremely
inaccurate and unscientific. They are far from the truth.
The science of psychology was developed mainly by the Hindus
as they studied the methods by which they reached the highest
religious experience—the superconscious state or samadhi. It is
the only method of understanding and controlling the mind in order
that a higher consciousness may be reached. According to the Yoga
Aphorisms of Patanjali, the mind becomes thoroughly illumined
and can transcend even the limitation of the nervous system when
it is controlled and unified in the course of concentration and deep
meditation. The mind can immediately and directly reach another
plane, the superconscious state, in which it experiences reality. This
is explained by Swami Vivekananda in Raja Yoga:

19
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
There is a still higher plane upon which the mind can work. It
can go beyond consciousness. Just as unconscious work is beneath
consciousness, so there is another work which is above
consciousness, and which is not accompanied with the feeling of
egoism. The feeling of egoism is only on the middle plane. . . . By
the effects, by the results of the work, we know that which is below,
and that which is above. When a man goes into deep sleep he
enters a plane beneath consciousness. He works the body all the
time, he breathes, he moves the body, perhaps, in his sleep, without
any accompanying feeling of ego; he is unconscious, and when he
returns from his sleep he is the same man who went into it. The
sum total of the knowledge which he had before he went into the
sleep remains the same; it does not increase at all. No enlightenment
does come. But when a man goes into samadhi, if he goes into it a
fool, he comes out a sage.21
Religious ideals and expressions are essential to the fulfillment
and culmination of consciousness in this supersensuous state. To
Hindus, religion is not a barrier to psychological development and
understanding; it is the very basis for the total illumination of the
mind.
According to Hindu psychologists, when the mind is subjected to
the discipline of yoga practices the fine nerve tissues of the body
undergo a consequent transformation. The physical and mental
forces of man are refined and unified, resulting in emotional balance,
development of adamantine will, and physical poise. A man who
has experienced samadhi or superconscious realization understands
the whole mind— conscious, subconscious, and superconscious.
He also reaches a stage where the mind functions independently of
21 The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda (Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas:
Advaita Ashrama, 1931), I, 180. Hereafter, this source of reference will be referred to
as Works.

20
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
the nervous system, as seen in the teachings of Swami
Brahmananda. In fact, to him the whole mind appears like a mirror
in which he can see the truth revealed. Again, this unified mind that
has been subjected to discipline through the practices of
concentration, meditation, and other processes, becomes a center
of power. When a man is master of his own mental forces, he will
be able to understand and influence the minds of others. He is well
established in poise and creates an atmosphere of peace. When
anyone enters the presence of such a person, he consciously or
unconsciously absorbs the peaceful atmosphere and derives poise
and benefit from the contact. A man of superconscious realization
can be compared to a luminous substance which radiates light. It
not only illumines itself but also objects within its radius. Similarly, a
man with a unified mind emanates wisdom and strength to others.

21
C H A P T E R I I
Cognition
I
T IS only within the last fifty years that the people of the Western
world have come to realize the importance of psychology and
see that it is not merely a philosophical or speculative study but also
an indispensable factor in adjustment to the demands of practical
everyday life. Hindus, on the contrary, have been aware of this for
centuries. For hundreds of years they have been using psychology
not only as a method for the unfoldment of religious truth, the basis
of their deep philosophy, but also as an aid in the field of medicine
and the key to health, poise, and harmonious living.
Generally speaking, it is the more utilitarian aspects of psychology
that have had a popular appeal in the West, especially in America—
for various reasons. In the field of medicine, for instance, more and
more attention is being given to the study of the effect of the mind
upon the nervous system, especially in cases of so-called “functional”
ailments. Physicians now say that the harmful effects of unbalanced
mental or emotional states upon physical well-being cannot be
overestimated, and they are emphasizing the need of mental and
emotional control as essential to good health. Medicines, drugs, and
even surgery have been known to fail in cases where the patient
did not have control of his mind or lacked emotional stability.
Again, a knowledge of psychology is proving to be very useful in
C

22
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
the business world. Those with commercial interests, especially in
the field of advertising, have made a careful study of the power of
suggestion in order to increase their sales. Enormous sums of money
are being spent to influence buyers, not only in display but also in
the use of radio, and every conceivable device is employed to interest
the public in the products that are being advertised. In many
businesses, courses in psychology are given to the sales clerks so
that they may be more successful in dealing with customers. For
instance, they are taught to give more attention to a man who is
shopping, as he is likely to buy what he wants in the first store to
which he goes, while a woman prefers to “shop around” and compare
values. Thus it is evident that influencing the minds of others has
come to be of great importance even in the business world.
Then there are people who want charm, beauty, or a magnetic
personality. Some desire to be successful politically, to gain control
over others, or to develop strong will power. All these and similar
wants have created a large market for books on psychology of a
pleasant popular variety, some of which are of little value. They
reflect the need of more and more help for the people in mastering
their problems, however, and they also show that the public is
beginning to appreciate the understanding of the mind as a guide to
practical living.
Finally, there are those who want to understand psychology for
its own sake. Almost everyone, at some time or other, has experienced
a desire to know more about himself. “Who am I?” “Why do I
exist?” and “What is my relationship to this objective world that I
face every day?” are only a few of the questions that cannot fail to
present themselves to an inquiring and intelligent mind. Yes, “Know
thyself” is still the key to wisdom, as it was in the days of Socrates;
and this self-knowledge as developed in Hindu psychology is the
way to freedom, truth, and harmonious living.

23
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
The study of psychology is essentially a study of the mind, its
functionings, its reactions to the objective world, and the methods
by which it obtains knowledge. For convenience we can define the
mind as “that which classifies, judges, and co-ordinates the
impressions and sensations gathered from the outside world—that
which knows and knows that it knows.”1 This, of course, brings us
face to face with several problems. For instance, who is the knower
and what is the nature of knowledge? How do I know that I know,
and how can I be sure that my knowledge is correct? Does the
mind have a separate existence apart from physical brain matter, or
is it only a bundle of sensations—the product of the sense organs
and the nervous system? We shall deal with each of these questions
in the course of this study, beginning with cognition or knowledge.
It has been shown by the great physicist and botanist, Sir J. C.
Bose of Calcutta, India, that even plants and the simplest organisms
have certain sensations and reactions that, of course, become more
pronounced in the higher forms of life. The lower animals are
provided with sense organs through which they gather a specialized
and peculiar knowledge of external things. Dogs, for instance,
depend a great deal upon their keen sense of smell; even a serpent
knows something of the world about him through his reaction to
sound, although he does not have the usual outer organs for hearing.
In studying reptiles, the Western psychologists have found that while
“some (lizards) apparently have auditory sensitivity; others (snakes)
apparently do not.”2 Animals have an instinctive knowledge that is
very accurate, though limited in scope as compared with cognition
and awareness in man.
There was a school of thinkers in India called Charbakas who,
like the behaviorists and other psychologists of similar type in the
1 Sri Sankaracharya, Vivekachudamani, pp. 93-94.
2 N. R. F. Maier and T. C. Schneirla, Principles of Animal Psychology (New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 1935), p. 219.

24
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
West, declared that thought processes, cognition, and emotion are
merely the products of nerve reaction, that the so-called “mind” is
only a bundle of successive sensations dependent upon the nervous
system and physical brain matter. Consciousness has no independent
existence. According to Watson:
It [consciousness] is a plain assumption just as unprovable, just
as unapproachable, as the old concept of the Soul. And to the
behaviorist the two terms are essentially identical, so far as concerns
their metaphysical implications. . . . They do not tell us what
consciousness is, but merely begin to put things into it by assumption;
and then when they come to analyze consciousness, naturally they
find in it just what they put into it.3
Watson and others assume that the existence of the entity depends
on the possibility of objective observation. The behaviorists seem to
forget that they cannot observe objectively their own thinking
processes, yet they believe that they can evaluate the psychological
concepts of Wundt, James, and others. They also assume that they
have something with which “to observe behavior.” As Watson says:
Why don’t we make what we can observe the real field of
psychology? Let us limit ourselves to things that can be observed,
and formulate laws concerning only those things. Now what can
we observe? Well, we can observe behavior and what the organism
does and says.4
The interest of the behaviorists is to observe behavior “in terms
of stimulus and response.”
If we examine these statements closely, we will see that these
psychologists are confusing consciousness with sensations, and the
3 John B. Watson, Behaviorism (2nd ed.; New York: W. W. Norton & Co., Inc.,
1930) p. 5.
4 Ibid., p. 6.

25
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
senses (the instruments for obtaining knowledge) with thought and
emotion. A simple illustration will explain this. Electricity acts through
wires and a bulb to produce light, but the electricity is neither the
wires nor the bulb; the light is the result of its action. Electricity
cannot be seen or described except in terms of its effect. We can
only prove its existence through the use of an external medium.
Similarly, the mind acts in ordinary persons through the brain and
nervous system (as mentioned in Chapter I), and it can only be
understood and interpreted by the way it uses the powers at its
disposal. Again, if the mind were only the product of nerve stimuli it
could be observed objectively. But the observation of the mind and
thought current of an individual is not objectively possible and cannot
be done successfully without subjective insight. How do you know
what your friends are thinking? How can anyone know exactly
what is going on in the mind of another? A man may appear to be
listening to a sermon, but in reality his mind is busily occupied
elsewhere—at home, at the bank, or thinking of some private worry.
Yet, to an objective observer, he seems to be giving attention to the
speaker. He alone knows what is really going on in his mind.
Another fact that the physiological, behaviorist, and mechanical
psychologists seem to have overlooked is the absolute necessity for
permanence and integration in the mind of the observer, so that he
may be able to classify and co-ordinate the impressions and
experiences gained through his objective study. If his mind is only a
bundle of successive sensations, how can he possibly hold the
memory of more than one sensation at a time? Again, how can one
sensation, which he himself is at the moment, be the observer of
another sensation which is the object of his study? In other words,
if I am nothing but a collection of sensations, how can that “I”
become the observer of “you” who are nothing but another
conglomeration of sensations? How can “I” correlate this

26
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
information if “I” can be conscious of only one thing, followed
immediately by something else? Obviously, there must be some
permanent factor that holds together these impressions and
differentiates between them. This brings us to the conclusion that it
must be the mind that perceives, experiences, and consequently
becomes a knower of the objective world. We should also remember
that the successive sensations cannot give us a total picture of a
thing unless there is a background as the receptacle of these
sensations. For instance, the moving pictures cannot become
perceptible unless there is a permanent background on which the
constant moving pictures are impressed.
Besides, the behaviorists, with their conception of sensation as
the mind itself, cannot explain the fact of memory. They do not tell
us how and where the different sensations are preserved in the
form of memory. We are compelled to accept that there is a
permanent receptacle of the residuals of experiences which is the
mind.
And we do not only have the cognition of the objective and
perceived world; we also have the cognition of the internal
awareness. Pleasurable and painful mental conditions are also
cognized by ourselves. These pleasurable and painful past and
present mental states and also the apprehensions and anxieties of
the future are cognized by human beings. Such experiences could
not be interpreted as mere successive sensations or nerve reactions.
There must be something which is in the background of this cognition
of the mental states themselves.
We all are aware of inner emotions. The emotions may be either
a reaction to external perception or they may be inner urges. We
perceive our own feelings of love, affection, hatred, envy, fear,
anxiety, and worry. If there is no separate existence of mind apart
from mere succession of sensations, then the perception of our

27
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
inner emotions would not be possible. We cannot perceive previously
experienced facts and their inner emotional reactions if we do not
have something to preserve them in the form of memories. In fact,
memory itself becomes impossible if there is no receptacle of
successive sensations. In order to understand these facts we can
refer to the previous example of moving pictures. It is the experience
of every thinking man that he is aware of his own emotions. It will
not be out of place to note also that we all have a kind of
consciousness of our persistent awareness of ourselves. As
philosopher Descartes says: “I think, so I exist.” One cannot explain
the different states and processes of mind without the acceptance
of a permanent mind.
Having established the necessity for the existence of the mind5
which is independent of mere sensations, we shall consider the ways
in which it functions with regard to perception of the objective world.
How does the knower gain knowledge? Who is the knower? What
is the relationship of the mind to external things?
According to Western psychologists, the sense organs receive
stimuli that are passed on by the nervous system to the brain cells.
Even the psychologists who accept the theory of independent
existence of the mind regard it as passive, while the objective world
is conceived as dynamic, impressing itself upon the mind through
the nervous system. However, they do not tell us how continuous
and successive sensations, received from the same object, are unified
in the mind that is passive. The Charles River flows in a continuous
stream; yet this successive flow of water, which is the Charles
River, gives the appearance of unity and oneness because of its
bed. Similarly, regardless of how quick the successive sensations
may be, it would not be possible to get a complete picture of a thing
without a permanent entity of mind.
5 Antahkarana, or internal instrument, according to Brahmasutra, Vedanta
Aphorism.

28
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Gestalt psychologists in their interpretation of the total mind are
nearing an understanding of it. They conceive that the entire object
is impressed on the whole mind. Some of the “action” psychologists,
and a few others, try to eliminate this problem of unification of
sensations in a passive mind by conceding that the mind becomes
active when stimulated by impressions, but the majority seems to
think that the mind is perfectly passive. Difficulties arise here
because successive and individual sensations could not possibly
become integrated in a passive mind, either by themselves or by the
mind as a passive receptacle. James, Münsterberg, and others of
actionist psychology, do not eliminate the difficulty in their
psychomotor ideas, as they say that stimuli are transposed into
responses. Mind seems to be entirely dependent on the stimuli even
though they measure the mind by its ability in action. Gestalt and
action psychologists also seem to fail to endow mind with
independence of sense stimuli, and so they limit the scope of the
mind. Even those psychologists who concede that the mind may
become active when external sensations are received fail to explain
how these fragmentary impressions can become unified. Some
psychologists say that the mind cannot really know an object but
can know only the sensations of that object. In that case, we could
not know anything of the objective world except the sensations
thereof. This would also mean that our knowledge would be
inaccurate, as we have to depend upon sensations which constantly
vary according to the nature and conditions of the perceiving person,
who is also an aggregate of successive and changeable sensations.
We often observe that a particular sensation of an object is
interpreted by different observers in different ways according to
the predisposition of the observing minds. Besides, the perceiving
mind also will change, as it is supposed to be in a flux.

29
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
According to Indian psychologists, it is the mind that reaches out
to the objective world through the sense organs and nervous system,
drawing its sensations and impressions through them and unifying
the experiences gathered into coherent information or knowledge.
The word “mind” corresponds to the Vedantic word antahkarana
(inner instrument)6 which has four functions: (1) manas, the
oscillating or indecisive faculty of mind; (2) buddhi, the decisive
state which determines that “this is a tree and not a man”; (3)
ahamkara, the state which ascertains that “I know”; (4) chitta,
the storehouse of mental states which makes remembrance and
reference possible. We can call this the “mind-stuff.”7 According
to the Hindu system of thought (Vedanta), antahkarana stands
between the Self and the object and receives the object of perception,
assuming its form as a whole. Gestalt psychology of the West has a
similar conception, although there is some difference. Antahkarana
is the inner instrument through which the subject knows the object
by identification. It is not the Self. Self is consciousness and not the
product of the relationship between subject and object. It is the
underlying, self-illumining principle. Self, or Atma, is called Sakshi,
the unchangeable Reality. It remains only as the witness. Mind, or
antahkarana, gets its power by association with the Self, or Atma,
which is the same as Brahman, or the Absolute. It has become
seemingly individualized by virtually limiting itself by ignorance.8
We do not propose to discuss further the metaphysical side of the
problem. It has been mentioned to complete the Hindu idea of
perception and its different aspects. There is a difference between
the Greek conception of the soul and its functions and the Hindu
6 Vivarana Prameya Samgraha and Vedanta Paribhasa.
7 The Sankhya system of thought in India offers a great deal of material on the
different functionings of the “mind-stuff.”
8 Works, I, 200-201.
C*

30
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
conception of Atma and its functions. Greek psychologists, including
Aristotle, conceive activity in the soul itself, although there are
differences among various Greek thinkers as to the nature of the
activity. But Atma of the Hindus is the unchangeable Reality, the
Great Witness, Consciousness Itself, Sakshi Chaitanya.
Hindu psychologists conceive the internal implement for
perception as the indriya (sense),9 which is independent of the
outer sense organs and nervous system, although it operates through
them. The indriya is not the mind, though the mind uses it as an
implement.10 A definite difference between the two is shown in the
following:
Know that the Soul, who sits within, is the master of the chariot,
and the body the chariot. Consider the intellect [buddhi] as the
charioteer, and the mind [manas] the reins. The senses [indriyas]
are the horses and their roads are the sense objects.11
The indriya is not passive; it is dynamic. It functions actively to
reach out to the objective world and stimulate the nervous system
and sense organs.12 The conception of indriya is utterly foreign to
Western psychologists, and there will be considerable doubt among
them concerning its existence. However, as we study perception
we shall see that the Hindus have good reason to conceive the
mind as actively seeking sensation, and that the existence of indriya
is logical.
Almost all the psychologists of the East and West accept
perception as the most direct method of obtaining knowledge. I see
you; therefore, I believe that you exist. If I also touch you I am
convinced that you are there. But suppose you are passing me on
9 Vivarana Prameya Samgraha and Vedanta Paribhasa. Indriya is translated as
“sense” as there is no other appropriate word for it. Some may consider this an
unusual use of the word “sense.”
10 Katha Upanishad 3:3.
11 Ibid., 3:3 and 4.
12 This is further elaborated in Vedanta Paribhasa.

31
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
the street and I do not see you. I may be looking in your direction;
my eyes are still functioning and your image is reflected upon the
retina; yet I do not know that you are there. Why? If my mind were
passive, I could not avoid seeing you. The stimulation to my mind
from the optic nerve would have informed me, but obviously some
part of the mind was not reacting to the stimuli. The mind was not
reaching out to the external world and stimulating the indriya to
observe; consequently, I could pass you without knowing that you
were there. This also explains so-called “absent-mindedness,” where
the internal instruments of perception, the indriya and the mind,
were not concerning themselves with the objective world and I
became forgetful of external matters. The indriya was preoccupied
or busily engaged with something else.
Although serpents have no external organs of hearing, they have
some internal means to cognize the sound. The Indian conception
of indriya explains this peculiar perceptive quality of serpents. Plants
also seem to have no external organs; yet, as Sir J. C. Bose
demonstrated, they have certain types of sensation. This proves
that they have some internal instrument of sensation.
Extrasensory perceptions cannot be explained if we do not accept
this inner sense of the mind. This will be treated more fully in another
chapter. It is enough to say here that the so-called extrasensory
perceptions take place without the least contact between the sense
organs and the object perceived. Here the indriya is gathering
experiences by projecting itself independently of the nervous system
and the sense organs. The knowledge thus obtained, without direct
contact with the object, can be tested to determine its validity as
true knowledge. Visions (not hallucinations) and similar experiences
are well-known examples of perception of this type. In dreams, or

32
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
in certain extraordinary states, some persons have had perceptions
that were proved to be prophetic. All this indicates the indriya’s
independence of the sense organs and nervous system.
There is another aspect of perception that needs to be considered.
This is the power of the mind to interpret the sensations of external
objects or sense stimuli. According to Western psychology, when
an object is perceived, its image is reflected by light waves upon
the retina of the eye in an inverted form, and from this image the
mind draws its conclusions about the object. It not only determines
size, color, proportion, and the various properties of the object, but
also sees it in its relation to other things of like or opposite nature.
The eye alone could not do all this. It is the mind that correlates and
unifies this information. The question will arise: How do we know
that the knowledge received corresponds to the reality of the object?
On a dark night a trunk of a tree may appear to be a robber, a
friend, or a ghost, depending upon the mental state of the person
who sees it. It is the internal instrument of perception that
differentiates between these impressions, classifying them as true
or false and choosing the one that seems to be most accurate. By
comparison with former experiences the mind “recognizes” that
the dark object in question is neither a man nor a ghost but is only
the trunk of a tree. Similarly, the mind discriminates between the
evidence produced by the senses to obtain knowledge of the external
world, the universe, and of other minds.
Although direct perception is generally conceded as the most
convincing proof of knowledge, there are other methods also that
may be accepted as valid, especially in cases where direct and
immediate perception would be impossible. For instance, we accept
knowledge upon authority. How do we know that there is war in
the world? We cannot perceive it directly. We are obliged to rely
upon the testimony of others, upon newspapers, and the information

33
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
gathered by people who are witnessing it in order to know that a
conflict is raging. It would be folly to say that there cannot be a war
because we cannot experience it directly. When the sources of
information can be checked as reliable and trustworthy, whether it
is a question of an event of history or the effects of a poison, the
conclusions reached may be accepted as true even though they
have been proved or experienced by others.
Another method of obtaining knowledge is by inference. It has
been observed that when a fire burns it produces smoke.
Consequently, if we see smoke we infer that there must be a fire
somewhere that is causing it. If volumes of smoke are pouring out
of a building, we do not wait to see flames before notifying the fire
department. We know by inference that a fire is there and that it
will destroy the building if it is not put out.
Inference and authority are not the same, although some people
try to classify them together. Authority can stand alone, independent
of inference. For example, the great fire of Chicago was a fact that
can be accepted upon authority. But we cannot infer it now since
the direct evidence of the destruction must have been cleared away
long ago.
Just as the sources of authoritative knowledge must be scrutinized
for reliability, so also does the proof of inferential knowledge depend
upon the validity of its conclusions and the major and minor terms.
Great care should be taken in establishing these; otherwise, the
inferential knowledge will be misleading or actually false. For that
matter, direct perceptions have to be scrutinized also, as the
subjective element in every factor in perception contributes a great
deal. In fact, perceptions vary according to the interpretations that
are given in the light of the notions of the mind. Western philosophers,
as well as Indian philosophers, mostly agree in recognizing the
contributions of the mind. Professor Eddington, in The Philosophy
of Physical Science, logically and factually tries to prove that even

34
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
scientific knowledge, which is supposed to be authentic, seems to
be relative, because he, too, believes that there is a subjective element
even in scientific perceptions.13 We can again cite the celebrated
illustration of Vedantic epistemology. On a dark night when a man
looks at a trunk of a tree, he often conceives it as a thief, or a
friend, or a policeman, according to the preconceived notions that
he has. Scrutiny is therefore needed in all these forms of cognition
and knowledge.
Induction and deduction are the methods of inference, and they
are used by modern scientists. In the deductive method a general
statement is taken and from that is deduced a particular truth. The
inductive method is just the opposite; scientific facts are used to
aim at a general conclusion. Almost all scientists directly or indirectly
use inferential methods as a means of cognition.
Indian Vedantic epistemology and psychology also accept
comparison, postulation, and nonperception as the means of new
knowledge. We are not discussing these points, as they are not
vitally related to the science of psychology. They are studied in
epistemology.
The question to which we referred in the earlier pages regarding
the validity of knowledge needs a little mention here. As this is also
vitally connected with epistemology, we should not elaborately
discuss the true criterion of knowledge or cognition. No philosopher
or psychologist can help questioning the validity of knowledge.
Consequently, a few propositions of the Indian schools of thought
should be briefly stated. Some thinkers, such as the pragmatists of
America, regard knowledge as a fact of true cognition when it has
practical value; the standards of real knowledge depend on its
practic?l application in life. We can accept a hypothesis and work
out certain schemes which may have practical value. Yet the
13 A. S. Eddington, Philosophy of Physical Science (Cambridge University Press,
1929).

35
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
hypothesis may not be true, as it will be contradicted by the later
discovery and perception. For instance, the astronomical theory of
solar rotation was later contradicted by the discovery of earthly
rotation; yet, for many practical purposes, the astronomical
calculations of the previous generations were useful.
There are some among Indians, as well as among Western
realistic thinkers, who hold that cognition is true when it corresponds
to real fact. This needs clarification regarding the very conception
of “real.” When we are living on a certain plane of existence things
may seem to be real, yet when we are transported to other planes
of existence those very things may be unreal. When a person with
jaundice looks at certain objects they appear to be yellow. So long
as the jaundiced condition remains, the perceptions will be colored
by it. Racial discrimination and differentiation are often based on
opinions and prejudices of those who are on the same plane of
existence or who have similar ideas and interests. Although the
opinions and prejudices may not actually be based on facts, they
are regarded as “real” and consequently the same patterns of
understanding and behavior are followed by other persons. When a
man dreams, the dream experiences are also real so long as the
dream state remains.
There is also another viewpoint among both Indian and Western
thinkers that knowledge or cognition must be coherent to the other
experiences. It must be in harmony with other states of life and
experiences. This view can also be questioned according to the
arguments against the previous viewpoint, namely, the
correspondence theory of knowledge. The Vedantic test of
knowledge is that it must never be contradicted at any time, and
knowledge or true cognition must consist in its noncontradiction
and newness.

36
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Hallucinations, dreams, and the ordinary perceptions of the
awakened state have certain cognitive value, yet hallucinations and
dreams vanish when our awakened cognitive state becomes
operative. Similarly, when a man rises to the superconscious state
(samadhi), or the fourth state of consciousness which will be
described in one of the later chapters, the awakened experiences,
that is to say, our ordinary sense perceptions and other such
experiences, are contradicted. This does not mean that Indian
philosophy regards the awakened cognitions as hallucinations. It
only means that the awakened cognitions are of relative types, such
as Professor Eddington describes in The Philosophy of Physical
Science. The only ultimate, uncontradicted, and unitary knowledge
is the knowledge one has at the time of spiritual realization
(samadhi). This whole evaluation of the different types of cognition
comes within the scope of epistemology proper. It requires, no doubt,
considerable discussion in a separate book. Yet in psychology proper
one should understand the criterion of true cognition.
The mental functionings in the form of cognition have considerable
influence over the body, as we shall discuss in the following chapter
on emotion. The mental states and processes, whether or not they
are in the form of cognition, emotion, or volition, have tremendous
influence on the mind itself and also on the body. Although these
three functionings are correlated, they are studied separately for
the sake of clarity and understanding.

37
C H A P T E R I I I
Emotion
I
N OUR previous discussion of the processes of cognition or
knowledge it was mentioned that every act of cognition has a
response within the mind. At the same time, knowledge is inseparably
connected with an inner emotional reaction; we cannot separate
knowledge from its emotional content. It is the purpose of this
discussion to present the factors inherent in the human mind which
condition man’s reaction to his surroundings, and we shall consider
how these factors can become constructive elements in a person’s
adjustment to his environment and can contribute to his happiness.
In addition to cognition we have primitive urges or impulses. Man
not only has emotional experiences resulting from external sensations
but he also has primitive urges independent of any sensation or
perception. Some Western psychologists, such as Professor William
James and C. G. Lange, have concluded that emotions generally
have their origin in sensations or perceptions. They also admit the
existence of primitive instinctive urges.
First, let us understand all the emotional reactions of the human
mind. Our interest in the understanding of emotions is not theoretical,
as it is of vital importance in human life and human conduct. A
man’s conduct cannot be understood unless we comprehend the
inner springs of his actions. These inner springs are what the great
psychologists call the instinctive urges or primitive impulses. They

38
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
are the driving forces of man’s life and activity. Therefore, we want
to know not only our own driving forces but also those that govern
the conduct of other individuals.
The interest in the study of emotions is of practical value.
Moreover, we realize that a man’s normal life cannot be well
established unless he has proper understanding and proper use of
his various emotions. Let us review briefly the five primitive urges
or emotions present in all human beings.1 It may seem that we are
arbitrarily classifying the emotions. It is recognized, however, that
they are interrelated within themselves and with other emotions;
yet for the sake of concrete understanding of our emotional life we
are mentioning five specific urges: (1) We observe that there is an
inherent impulse in people known as self-preservation. It is, no doubt,
of primary importance yet it produces many secondary emotions or
what we may call prospective and retrospective emotions, namely:
apprehension, anxiety, fear, and such other responses. Every animal
has an abundance of this emotion of self-preservation. Even the
child shows this instinct before it begins to know anything about
itself or its environment. (2) Then there is the urge of self-expression
to be considered. We not only struggle to live and prolong our lives,
but we also want to express ourselves. If we do not have proper
avenues of self-expression, we become miserable. We also find
that if this particular urge is extremely accentuated it creates
considerable disturbance in our lives. Self-expression is associated
with a number of other urges, such as aggression and submission.
(3) The sex impulse becomes a strong force in motivating different
activities in all beings. We not only want to express ourselves but
1 The emotions are differently classified by various outstanding thinkers. It is
interesting to note that William I. Thomas and Florian Znaniecki mention four
wishes of man: (1) new experience, (2) security, (3) response, and (4) recognition. See
William I. Thomas and Florian Znaniecki, The Polish Peasant in Europe and America,
Vol. III, Life Record of an Immigrant (Boston: Richard G. Badger, The Gorham Press,
1919), especially pp. 33 and 57.

39
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
we want to perpetuate our existence in the form of our children and
reproduce the race so that it may continue. There is a pleasure
element in the very expression of this impulse. This urge is associated
with love, sympathy, affection, envy, jealousy, and many other
secondary prospective as well as retrospective emotions. (4) As a
result of the gregarious urge or desire for companionship, human
beings find it difficult to live alone; they want company. When they
cannot express themselves or their emotions of love, affection, or
sympathy, they feel suffocated. Many persons feel extremely alone
when they have no outlet for their emotions. Some thinkers are of
the opinion that man seeks company for self-preservation so that
he can fight the battle for life and have different types of pleasure
with his fellow beings. According to them, this urge is a phase of
self-preservation. We do not agree with such interpretations. When
we deeply study human beings, we find that the gregarious instinct
is an independent urge. The accompanying secondary emotions are
love, envy, jealousy, and other such responses. (5) With the impulse
of knowledge, man wants to know not only himself and all the desires
within him but also about his environment, other people, and nature.
It is not that we acquired this urge as we began to develop our
civilization, but it is an inherent quality of mind. This urge of
knowledge also has secondary emotions. We have already discussed,
in the previous chapter, that the element of knowledge is present in
various forms not only in man, civilized and uncivilized, but also in
animals.
All these five primitive urges are component urges and they do
not always work independently and separately. They are often linked
with other emotions. Take, for instance, a primitive urge of self-
preservation which is associated with fear and anxiety. We do not
know how many persons have a peculiar complex of fear of ghosts.

40
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
It sounds amusing, but let us give an example. We know that this
so-called ridiculous emotion of fear of ghosts will create many other
different emotions. Most people have heard about ghosts and have
certain notions about them. When one goes to an empty dark house,
particularly after any recent misfortune of death, one feels rather
uncomfortable and nervous. If a few squeaks are heard when the
door is opened, the person at once jumps to the conclusion that
someone is walking around inside, and the first impulse is to run
away from the place. We know of occasions when people actually
tried to run away, and it was not in India but right here in American
cities. We happen to know personally of one occasion when some
people were frightened. On inquiry it was found that the floors
were cracking owing to their construction and the expansion caused
by heat. When the people realized that it was not a ghost but only
the heat that was making the cracking sounds, the result was laughter,
or the emotion of amusement, when they understood how foolish
they had been to think that there was a ghost in that particular
house.
We have fear, then curiosity, and finally amusement successively
occurring in many of our experiences. It is difficult to separate
these primitive urges from the secondary emotions; they are, as it
were, linked together. All the primitive urges are associated with
other emotions such as fear, amusement, laughter, anxiety,
apprehension, and remorse. Some times, we are likely to become
apprehensive of the presence of these primary and secondary
emotions and urges within us. Being worried, we create certain
disorders in our minds; our behavior is changed, and our conduct
becomes remorseful. We ask ourselves why we had these
apprehensions, worries, and anxieties. We know that because of
them we often wreck our nervous systems. Then we become
remorseful and regret that we have indulged ourselves in such

41
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
expressions of emotion which have ruined our health. If we control
ourselves, we are amused that we were so foolish as to have ruined
ourselves; we should have known better. In this way the emotions
act and react, creating many by-products in the form of functional
ailments and disturbances. When these primitive emotions lose their
proper balance and create many strong secondary emotions, they
cause conflicts in our lives.
We have higher ideas and evaluate ourselves as to what we
should or should not do. When we become a little emotional, we
think that it is not right to be so. Let us take jealousy, for instance.
We are extremely fond of a person. Then someone else comes to
like him, and we become jealous. We cannot help relating one thing
we have observed in this country, and we hope you will not be
offended. It seems that people have formed particular notions that
an individual can like or love only one person. Sometimes they ask:
“Can a religious teacher have more than one student?” It seems to
an Oriental a shocking question, and we think that it would be
shocking to an American professor if any student asked: “Sir, can
you have more than one pupil?” We believe any teacher or professor
would be extremely offended if he were challenged in that way.
Unfortunately, we find that many people in the pseudo-religious
organizations seem to think that teachers can have only one student.
The others become extremely jealous of the student or group who
may be associated with a spiritual teacher. It is amusing to a Hindu,
and we think it would be amusing to all Orientals; however, this
abnormal idea of a teacher is far from the truth. This is not the
principle to be discussed. Yet, when a person tries to study philosophy
with the abnormal idea that one teacher can have only one or a few
students, he feels a kind of embarrassment. Because that feeling is
present the sense of self-respect creates a conflict in the mind that

42
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
he should not be jealous of that person nor should he express jealousy
because the person is a student of a particular teacher. Our spiritual
philosophy or mystical training convinces us that we must not express
jealousy or envy if we want to be spiritual. This creates a natural
conflict in us. Suspicion, and other such secondary emotions, also
create extreme forms of mental and nervous disorders and change
our behavior.
Suppose we see or hear many nice things about a person whom
we envy. We say: “Oh, yes, he is agreeable; however, he doesn’t
dress well. He is awkward and stands in this way or that way.” We
happen to know an interesting person, a prominent man, who is
extremely jealous of one of his colleagues. At the same time, the
man knows that he should not express jealousy, as it is not becoming
of him. This very conflict colors his behavior and causes him to use
slandering expressions in order to lower the other person. We have
seen it occur repeatedly and it is most unfortunate. This particular
individual suffers from the effect of emotional conflict in his mind,
behavior, and body. He has become neurotic and has developed
serious functional ailments.
Psychologists who are followers of Freud think that conflicts
and frustrations are created only in connection with the sex urge or
pleasure urge. Adlerians have the idea that conflicts and frustrations
are created because of the urge of self-expression or the power
urge. Both are far from the truth. They try to associate the conflict
with a specific emotion which is regarded by the particular school
as the master urge. It has been found through later interpretation
and study that such facts were not true. We happen to know an
interesting psychiatrist who allowed himself to be analyzed by
Freudians who interpreted his case in terms of sex impulses. Adler
also analyzed him and tried to explain that difficulties were created

43
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
by the malfunctioning of or conflict in self-expression. The gentleman
himself was not convinced. We had occasion to study his case
carefully, and it is our impression that a kind of dissatisfaction with
life itself created these disturbances, as he does not have a sound
philosophy of life. The elements of self-preservation, knowledge,
and companionship are operating in the human mind, and conflicts
and frustrations can be created by any one of these primitive instincts.
An individual was persuaded by his parents to take up engineering.
He had considerable success; yet he was not happy about it in spite
of his position, and he began to have functional ailments. It was
found that the type of profession imposed upon him was not
satisfactory to his inner nature. He succeeded to the best of his
ability, but it did not give him satisfaction. The same situation was
found to be true in the case of the psychiatrist previously mentioned;
his profession did not satisfy his inner nature, so the symptoms of
functional ailments and mental disturbances became operative. It
will not be out of place to say that he had a successful profession,
well-established social position, normal marriage, and normal children.
Similarly, we find that a person can have conflict created by the
knowledge urge. All of these emotions can create a conflict and
produce functional ailments. These primitive urges and secondary
emotions, prospective as well as retrospective, can have serious
effects on our bodies. It has been discovered that the secondary
emotions of worry and remorse result in nerve disorders. Headache,
heart trouble, and all sorts of pains and aches are created by these
emotions. Little do we understand how such inner emotions can
cause physical disturbances. Dr. Joseph H. Pratt of the Boston
Dispensary says:
Dr. Golden working in the medical clinic of the Boston Dispensary
has studied the effect of suggestion in about 300 cases of pain.

44
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Often the pain had been continuous and severe for weeks or months.
His procedure consists of thrusting a hypodermic needle attached
to an empty syringe into the skin of the painful area after it has
been painted with iodine for the purpose of sterilizing the skin. Dr.
Golden does not tell the patient he is going to remove the pain. As
he is preparing for the needle test in the presence of the patient he
remarks in a low voice to his assistant, but plainly audible to the
patient, how surprising it is that the procedure he is about to employ
has removed all pain within a minute or two in 90 per cent of the
cases in which he has used it. After the needle has been withdrawn
he stands by the patient’s side, watch in hand. At the end of thirty
seconds he asks how the pain is now and writes down the answer.
At the end of a minute the query is repeated. Usually the patient
says it is less at the end of thirty seconds and entirely gone after
two minutes. In about half the cases the pain returned within twenty-
four hours following this treatment by suggestion but sometimes
complete relief persisted for weeks and rarely for months.
Dr. Golden’s work indicates that apparently pain of psychic origin
is common, and furthermore it has demonstrated that this pain is
often localized and may occur in persons who present no obvious
signs of hysteria or nervousness. . . . The conclusion seems justifiable
that a pain removed immediately by mental treatment is probably
mental rather than physical in origin but we have found occasionally
that organic pain has been abolished by Golden’s procedure—in
one instance the pain in acute pleurisy and in another epigastric
pain in a patient who had a peptic ulcer which later perforated.2
A prominent scientist reported to me an interesting case showing
how fear can paralyze a person. A businessman went on a pleasure
trip with a companion. When they were coming back they were
2 Joseph H. Pratt, The Influence of Emotions in the Causation and Cure of
Psychoneuroses (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co., 1934), pp. 9-10. Reprinted from
International Clinics, Vol. IV, Series 44.

45
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
overtaken by a bad snowstorm. The man almost lost hope of
returning home safely. There was strong fear of losing prestige and
getting into trouble. When he arrived home, he was paralyzed and
could not get out of the car. This man could not be cured medically;
even psychiatric treatment could not help him, but he was later
cured by prayer and other spiritual methods. The scientist who told
this is of the opinion that the man recovered when fear and
apprehension of various types, including consciousness of guilt and
sin, were removed from his mind. The effect vanished and paralysis
disappeared.
Another person has been suffering from ear trouble and has been
treated by several ear specialists. The latest diagnosis of a great
specialist is that emotional disturbances, dissatisfaction, and
unhappiness are affecting the glands and the circulatory system,
resulting in this type of ear trouble. According to the specialist, the
patient can be cured only when he will have emotional satisfaction.
It is observed that he feels well when he is peaceful and not upset.
Dr. Pratt reports that even toothache and other such troubles
originate in the emotional life of an individual. This does not mean
that toothache is imaginary; but apprehension, worry, disgust,
jealousy, and anger disturb the proper functioning of the nerves,
and ailments follow. Dr. Alexander makes interesting observations
and statements regarding psychosomatic disorders.3 Today, the
majority of prominent physicians are thoroughly convinced that most
of our physical ailments are originally functional disorders. Dr. Elihu
S. Wing, President of the Rhode Island Medical Society, often detects
psychogenic functional disorders, pains, and aches; and he treats
the cases accordingly. He definitely suggests that a sound philosophy
of life and consequent mental stability are of immense help to the
3 Alexander, The Medical Value of Psychoanalysis, pp. 188-98.

46
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
functional cases. Moreover, he and other physicians find that even
glandular trouble, like overactivity of the thyroid and other glands, is
created and accentuated by emotional causes. We know that many
other physicians follow this method and help the patients by
establishing mental adjustment and stability. In fact, we happen to
be acquainted with the diagnoses made by some of the prominent
physicians who definitely suggest this method in cases with functional
ailments.
When the mind is troubled, when it has conflicting tendencies
and is inharmonious and restless, the whole nervous system will be
upset and will not function properly. Glands will be affected, and
the circulatory system also will be disturbed. As a result, many
ailments arise such as dyspepsia, headache, indigestion, and other
difficulties which can easily become chronic. Perhaps many persons
would be surprised to learn that some surgical cases were found to
be really functional in origin and could have been treated and cured
had they been detected in time.
Several years ago we had the interesting experience of
interviewing a great surgeon in Boston with regard to a patient who
appeared to be a surgical case. Some doctors had diagnosed the
condition, which was acute, as duodenal ulcer. The Boston surgeon,
after examining the patient and studying X-ray pictures which he
had taken, came to the conclusion that the case was really functional,
which has since proved to be true. We were told that a certain
surgeon had definitely wanted to operate, but the Boston doctor
had a different opinion. “Swami,” he said to me, “I can operate on
this man but it would be cruelty to do so. After the operation I can
tell you that he will be all right for a few days. As long as he is in the
hospital, as long as he is an invalid, and as long as he does not
resume his normal activities he will get on well enough; but the
moment he takes up his customary duties, his old ailments will
reappear. In other words, as long as he remains quiet, his mind will

47
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
be at ease and he will be all right; but as soon as he attempts to do
his usual work, his mind will be disturbed, and the old symptoms will
return. So, Swami, tell him to learn to live.” Would you not accept
that advice from an eminent surgeon concerning a patient who was
supposed to be a surgical case? His words, “tell him to learn to
live,” have deep significance.
We had a similar experience with another Boston surgeon who
was a well-known specialist in cancer and malignant diseases,
perhaps the most outstanding scientist in this field in the East. Again
the case was supposed to be surgical, but he told me definitely that
it was merely functional and not a case of cancer. In other words,
it was also a case of nerve disorder. This doctor advised the patient
to strengthen his mind. He said that when the nervous system was
controlled and strengthened the symptoms of disease would
disappear. From these two instances, and other such cases, it is
safe to conclude that the claims made by reliable psychotherapeutists
and psychiatrists are really valid.
Every emotion has its reaction in the nervous system. For instance,
love, sympathy, affection, or high spiritual emotions have a pleasing
reaction. Have we not observed that when a mother is extremely
irritated and comes into the presence of a sweet, smiling child her
whole facial expression changes? We have also seen that when we
have been in the presence of a gigantic spiritual personality the
whole body was refreshed. We have, on certain occasions, seen
people coming to a great spiritual personality with much sorrow
and heartache, and after remaining in that presence even for a few
minutes the people were changed. There was little talk. Perhaps
the holy man said: “Hello, come in” or “How are you?” Perhaps he
gave a gentle touch of blessing. It is almost impossible to believe
that such things happen, but his smiling and happy presence removed
the whole heartache, and the nerves became quiet.

48
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
It is also true that when we eat we should have a happy
atmosphere and not become excited. We should talk of pleasant
things because it helps digestion. Then the nerves function properly
and the body remains quiet. On the other hand, when we have
violent emotions we find the body shaking. With an outburst of anger
the body trembles all over, poison is generated, and we cannot have
proper digestion.
We have repeatedly seen that many lives are ruined by conflicts
of emotion. Apart from the conflict, the emotions also create
functional ailments and mental disturbances if there is a lack of
balance. It is interesting to know that the human mind possesses
certain powers of establishing a kind of harmony among the primitive
emotions. The normal man is one whose emotions are well balanced.
As there is always a danger of neurosis, however, we should be
constantly alert that we do not lose the balance of the mind. When
there is conflict or an extremely strong emotional urge, we often try
to repress it either because of our feeling of self-respect or for
other reasons.
Many of the Freudians, and even Lord Russell, would have us
believe that repression is generally created by the so-called ethical
and religious teachings. Some seem to think that religious teachings
are responsible for repressions; others are of the opinion that the
mind tries to repress painful emotions or experiences; while another
group comes to the conclusion that it is not merely the sense of pain
that causes repression but the sense of propriety, self-respect, and
other such ideas. However, we can safely conclude that it is our
very nature to repress disagreeable or unbecoming emotions or urges;
and if we observe that our feelings are getting out of hand, we try
to repress them. These repressions may be of voluntary or
involuntary types.
A psychiatrist told us about the interesting case of his son, who
was an officer during the First World War. Whenever he was asked

49
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
to lead a particular operation, he felt almost paralyzed. He was so
nervous about it that his voice was affected and he could not move.
Fear of fear was most paralyzing to him; he was afraid lest others
notice that he was in that condition. After a few moments, somehow
or other he would regain his strength. This happened every time he
had to do a particular thing. In this case the fear was so possessive
that he wanted to repress it, yet the paralyzing effect was there.
It is true that repression of emotion is harmful and it creates
functional ailments. Again, many persons adopt a defense reaction.
They want to hide their emotions and they show other attitudes
instead. Sometimes people take up what they call substitution. They
have a strong emotion of sex or self-expression for which they try
to substitute something creative in the form of art, painting, and
other such activities. Then they sublimate that particular emotion
through music or the arts. It is found that these methods are not
permanently successful. When proper conditions or environments
are offered, the original urges again become operative. All limitations,
all embankments or defenses, so to speak, are washed away. We
often observe that when there is a mighty current in the river the
little embankments are swept away, creating havoc. Similarly, these
emotional urges sometimes become so strong that, if the right stimuli
are offered and the environment is favorable, all methods of
substitution and sublimation become negligible.
Hindu psychologists, in fact spiritual leaders all over the world,
advocate the use of self-control. This does not mean repression, as
many psychiatrists and rationalists seem to apprehend. Self-control
is based on the understanding and use of higher values of life. Stoics
would advise one to control certain tendencies and conditions,
knowing they are undesirable yet sometimes feeling helpless in
coping with them. The real spirit of self-control, however, as we

50
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
advocate it, is based on the changing values of life. When a man
learns to eat a better type of food, he has no further interest in an
inferior quality. Similarly, when one’s mind is in the habit of enjoying
higher values, like spiritual understanding and realization, it does not
find an interest in the lower tendencies or human urges and instincts.
Some of the Western psychologists, such as McDougall and
others, seem to think that the instincts cannot be changed. It is true
that instinctive drives are inherent in animals; but they do not seem
to realize that man, in spite of his animal nature, is more highly
evolved. Man does not live on the instinctive plane. His intellectual
achievements prove that he can overcome some of the instinctive
drives by cultivation of higher intellectual attitudes. We also observe
that man has a still higher nature, a spiritual nature, which includes
moral values. When man evolves on the spiritual plane, he completely
changes his primitive instincts and urges. Sri Ramakrishna, the great
spiritual leader of modern India, gives an appropriate illustration in
this connection: “When the new leaves sprout in a palm tree, the
old leaves drop off without doing any damage whatsoever to the
plant itself.” Similarly, when the spiritual nature of man is evolved
in the form of love, unselfish service, sacrifice, and other such noble
tendencies, his primitive urges drop off. In fact, his instincts are
changed completely. It will not be out of place to say that even an
animal changes its instinctive nature when it is domesticated and
kept in a spiritual and harmonious atmosphere. We know a case in
which a dog and a deer actually lived together in a spiritual place
with towering spiritual personalities and did not express their natural
enmity. They completely overcame their primitive instincts and lived
as friends. We also know that a cat and a mouse lived in the same
place without showing any instinctive enmity toward each other.

51
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
Many domestic animals change their primitive urges when they are
retrained and kept in a harmonious atmosphere. Even ferocious
animals change their natures under the influence of great spiritual
personalities, as we know in the life of St. Francis of Assisi and also
some great Hindu teachers.
“To die to live” is to overcome the lower self and lower directions
of the emotions in order to manifest the higher nature and higher
values of life. Then one expands and becomes absorbed in higher
phases of experience. Consequently, the lower tendencies die out.
The spirit of self-control can be clearly understood from the evolution
of human nature. A child is, no doubt, absorbed in dolls, but when
maturity comes he enjoys higher emotional expressions far more
than the satisfactions he found in the dolls. When a person grows
up, he seeks the highest values of spiritual culture in love,
unselfishness, and other such elevated ideals. His nature goes
through a transformation. When a man constantly thinks and acts
on the higher planes of existence and manifests higher values in his
activities, and when he is in a state of divine realization, his whole
system is thoroughly changed and transformed. Selfish attitudes
and gratifications are naturally to be controlled in order that we
may expand and gradually become universal. Human beings possess
a peculiar relationship with God and until they have a definite
realization of that connection there is no peace. There is an inherent
tendency in man to be universal. “Joy is in the Infinite, not in the
finite,” the Upanishads (Hindu scriptures) tell us. This explains
why a man cannot help seeking religious unfoldment. Knowing these
basic principles of human nature, we cannot conclude that self-
control is to be construed as repression.
The most outstanding urge in people is the search after the abiding
spirit or God. There is an inherent desire in every man to experience

52
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
the abiding spirit, and until he reaches that goal there is no hope for
real peace of mind. This may seem to be a strong declaration, but
when we think of God we find that the primitive instincts are reduced
to the master urge for bliss. We may have a strong feeling for self-
expression or any other urge, yet, when we carry it out, we are not
satisfied. The successful physician and psychiatrist, who was
previously mentioned, has a fine family and home, yet he remains
dissatisfied. Something is missing; something is lacking. You and I
know and have found that when people have led a life of success
they very frequently have no real satisfaction inside themselves in
spite of their so-called expression and position.
Until the innate urge for bliss is fulfilled and understood, there is
no satisfaction in life. Frustrations cannot otherwise be successfully
eliminated. We do not realize that we possess in the soul a mine of
bliss. We go here and there seeking self-expression and self-
preservation, while the whole thing is within us. Sri Ramakrishna
illustrates this with an interesting example. The musk deer develops
musk around its navel. When it matures, the deer gets its fragrance
and searches everywhere for it; the foolish deer does not know
that he possesses this fragrance all the time. We, too, do not realize
that the mine of joy is within us, and we seek happiness in outside
activities and pursuits. When we find inner joy, the other emotions
are established in their proper places. It does not mean that you or
I have to go to a monastery or convent to understand the guiding
spirit. In this world we must make Him the center of life, and then
we will find the emotions will be well balanced. The individual
members of a symphony orchestra have direction and guidance
from the conductor. If the influence of the conductor is withdrawn
and the different players are allowed to lose co-ordination and co-
operation, there will be conflict, confusion, and chaos. Similarly, if

53
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
the guiding principle of divine power or spiritual value of life is
withdrawn, there will be inevitable chaos in the life of a man resulting
in conflict and frustration. But as long as we have God as the center
of our lives we will find that the emotions of primitive and secondary
types will be harmonized and integrated, and all conflicts will be
dissolved. Life will be a wonderful expression of joy and happiness.
This conclusion can be verified by the study of the lives of men and
women who have attained a high level of spiritual realization.
D

54
C H A P T E R I V
The Subconscious Mind
U
NTIL about fifty years ago, almost all psychologists and
philosophers in the West were interested only in the
understanding of the conscious state of mind, while the study of the
subconscious, or unconscious, was practically neglected. Although
there have been a few references to the subconscious in the writings
of psychologists, they do not give us complete understanding of it.
In the West the study of the subconscious mind was started by
Charcot and his student Janêt, the great French psychologists. They
made a study of some mental cases and, in the course of their
observation, they realized that the conscious states of mind and
behavior of man depend greatly on something that is not known to
the individual or to others. During their experiments in hypnotism1
they gathered materials which convinced them that the mind has
not only a conscious state but also a hidden state, the subconscious,
which is the determining factor of man’s conscious activities. Janêt’s
successor, Freud, made a great discovery of the inner states of the
mind which are not known to the average man and yet are powerful
and extremely dynamic in changing his conscious activities and
behavior.
The study of the subconscious is not one of mere scholastic interest
1 Mesmer started the practice of hypnotism (then known as mesmerism). Dr.
Braid, an English surgeon, later began to use it under the name of hypnotism.

55
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
or philosophical implication; it is vitally connected with the personality
of man. We cannot determine the behavior of an individual unless
we have a thorough understanding of his subconscious states of
mind. The larger portion of the mind is not known to anyone. It
remains submerged, like the iceberg, under the conscious realm.
Nevertheless, the subconscious mind is more powerful and dynamic
than the conscious mind. According to many of the Western
psychologists, the subconscious mind determines human behavior;
in fact, the conscious activities of an individual are wholly determined
by the subconscious states. Often when we act in a particular way
we ask ourselves: “Why do I behave like this?” The reason why
we cannot answer this is that the behavior is not caused by our
conscious mind but by the power of the subconscious. Many Western
psychologists conclude that this subconscious really makes up the
conscious, which is nothing but a few bubbles that arise on the
surface of the mind. Hindus explain the subconscious by saying
that it is the repository of the samskaras or past impressions which
make up the main contents of the subconscious mind. In his
exposition of Karma Yoga, Swami Vivekananda says:
Every work that we do, every movement of the body, every
thought that we think, leaves such an impression on the mindstuff,
and even when such impressions are not obvious on the surface
they are sufficiently strong to work beneath the surface, subcon-
sciously . . . each man’s character is determined by the sum total of
these impressions.2
Thus we see that the study of the subconscious is of vital impor-
tance. We cannot have an understanding of a person and his be-
havior until we understand his inner states of mind.
When we study the mind we see that it is the arena of conflicting
emotions and feelings, ideas and sentiments. It is the battlefield of
our mental states and processes. It contains the conscious thoughts
2 Works, I, 52.

56
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
and feelings within the scope of our awareness as well as the
subconscious ideas and emotions of which we are oblivious. Often
thoughts and tendencies arise from the subconscious realm which
the conscious mind tries to submerge or repress. This tendency to
repress is called “defense reaction.” Frequently we may have
impulses, emotions, or feelings that we know are unworthy, unwise,
or unpleasant, and we endeavor to suppress them, to keep them
under control, thinking that by doing this we have driven them away.
Unfortunately, they have not gone. They remain in the realm of the
subconscious and are preserved within our inner mental life. When
an opportunity occurs, they will rise to the surface and become
active. If they are very strong, and yet are kept in a repressed state
for a long time, they may create nerve disorders, neurotic conditions,
or an unbalanced state of mind. Repressed emotions and feelings,
unconscious urges and desires create functional diseases. They are
at the root of many ailments and maladies. Again, the repressing
process may occur on the subconscious plane. Sometimes
subconscious feelings, ideas, and complexes do not allow freedom
of expression or the functioning of urges on the conscious plane.
Such restriction is called “censorship” by modern psychoanalysts.
There is another method of dealing with forbidden or unfulfilled
desires and repressed tendencies which the psychoanalysts call
“sublimation.” This takes place when the mind makes a conscious
effort to substitute one emotion for another or to give an urge another
mode of expression. The emotion, while still being utilized, is diverted
from the course that it would naturally have taken; and the vital
energy, or libido, is directed into other channels. In this way the
object of desire is replaced gradually by another ideal, and its
motivating power is absorbed in the attainment of another purpose.

57
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
Suppose a man has a very strong urge or instinct that pulls him
toward a certain course of action, but he tries to direct it to some
other channel. Perhaps he will turn it to artistic or literary creation
or to some other constructive pursuits, believing that by so doing he
will be able to remove his original strong impulse. Many persons
think that this process will enable them to control submerged or
subconscious emotions and sentiments. They try to direct their
forbidden impulses to some higher form of expression. In some
cases sublimation becomes creative and constructive; sometimes it
gives new light to a man in mental conflict.
There are people, however, who do not take up the process of
sublimation but resort to liquor, narcotics, or other habits in order to
forget frustrated desires, mental conflicts, and disturbances. No
doubt they are trying to escape from agonizing conditions, but this is
not the way out. The relief they get is only temporary, for they have
merely exchanged a forbidden, repressed, or unsatisfied desire for
something more dangerous. Although alcohol and drugs may release
the mind temporarily from the pain of its frustrated hopes and
longings by giving it false stimulation, forgetfulness, or pleasant
physical sensations, the ultimate effects upon the brain and nervous
system are deadly. The desire for liquor or narcotics will become
more and more imperious, until torture is suffered in trying to satisfy
these cravings. Also, the original cause of the addiction to these
habits has not been removed. It will remain in the mental background
to torment and incite one to further indulgence. A study of the persons
who become slaves of drugs or alcohol will convince anyone that
the will power is gradually weakened and destroyed and emotional
balance and control are lost. The whole nervous system, both
voluntary and involuntary, becomes seriously affected with the
consequent development of functional ailments. While the process

58
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
of sublimation can often help individuals in solving their emotional
problems, this other method of escape never does. On the contrary,
it causes extreme disintegration of the mind.
Modern psychoanalysts claim that neither defense reaction nor
sublimation is sufficiently strong to eliminate our inner conflicts.
Instead, they may actually cause complexes. It is often true that
defense reactions and censorship are responsible for repressions
and the creation of complexes. Repressions are very harmful. Hindu
psychologists, as well as the psychiatrists of the West, agree that
repressed tendencies are at the root of fear complexes and
sometimes of superiority, inferiority, and sex complexes, as well as
of other neurotic conditions. Sublimation, however, can be effective
if employed with right understanding. All complexes are actually
created by the tendencies in the subconscious mind that are
repressed by conscious thought or feeling, censorship exerted upon
the conscious from the subconscious plane, or by certain unconscious
tendencies. Herein lies the utility of psychotherapy.
Through psychotherapy, attempts are made to reveal
subconscious mental states and processes, thoughts, urges, and
desires. The claim is made that most of the mental, nervous, and
functional diseases can be cured if a person can only unearth his
hidden desires, emotions, and complexes. The moment they are
uncovered and recognized by the patient, that very moment the
problem of a neurotic condition or unbalanced mental state will be
solved. According to many psychoanalysts, the natural expression
of repressed urges and emotions will cure the suppressed tendencies,
putting an end to the neurotic state. They insist that expression
must be given to the primitive instincts or urges of man. In fact,
unexpressed love or hatred must be released and directed to the
physician. Some are of the opinion that this very release and

59
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
expression often relieve the mental tension and establish a mental
balance.
There are various methods by which psychoanalysts try to restore
a patient to a normal state of mind, such as suggestion and analysis.
These methods are not mutually exclusive but are considered
separately for convenience. Suggestion itself has two forms. First,
it may be given from the outside —that is, by the analyst or doctor.
If the patient accepts the suggestion, he endeavors to absorb it into
his system, thereby establishing a harmonious state of mind. The
suggestion is meant to act upon the mind to eliminate conflict between
a strong urge and some other tendency. Of course, this suggestive
method must be based upon a “transference” relationship between
the doctor and patient. There must be a transference of feeling;
otherwise, the suggestion given will not be accepted or assimilated,
and there will be no effective result. Transference between the
doctor and patient is, therefore, essential to psychotherapy. It is
interesting to note what Dr. Carl Binger says in this connection in
his recent book, The Doctor’s Job. The chapter on “The
Relationship between Doctor and Patient” is extremely helpful for
both physicians and psychotherapeutists. Dr. Binger definitely feels
that there must be a friendly relationship between doctor and patient.
He says: “Its importance lies in the fact that the physician’s
effectiveness, his power to heal, depends in good measure upon the
inwardness of this relationship.”3 He shows that the recovery of
patients from various illnesses is affected by the relationship with
the doctor. Then he says: “I am noting the addition of a new
instrument to the doctor’s medical bag—the instrument is trained
human understanding. Without it some of our drugs and tests and
gadgets may prove egregiously useless.”4
3 Binger, The Doctor’s Job, p. 43.
4 Ibid., p. 51.

60
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Hindu psychologists are of the opinion that there must be a
harmonious relationship or friendship between the teacher (Guru)
and the student or psychologist and client, whichever the case may
be. The student or client must be in a receptive mood in order to get
durable results from the help given by the psychologist. A mere
release of emotional tension may be temporarily helpful and
consoling to the distressed mind, or a sympathetic and friendly chat
relieves the pain of frustration and mental conflict, yet neither has a
permanent value in the integration of mind or in resolving the
emotional conflicts and tension. Therefore, the Hindu psychologists
insist that not only must the client or student have harmonious feeling
toward the psychologist but he should also be in a receptive and
submissive mood. On the other hand, the psychologist must be a
man of integration in order to be of real help. Furthermore, he must
be established in the higher principles of religion.5 That is to say, he
must not only have intellectual or theological understanding of religion
but he must also be thoroughly established in the practical application
of religious principles in his emotional reactions. Moreover, he must
have unification of thought, emotion, and will.
In its second form, suggestion is given by the person himself. A
man may realize, either by self-analysis or through some other means,
that his mental dissatisfaction and conflict are creating nerve
disorders, mental agitation, irritation, worries, sleeplessness, and
consequent functional disturbances. He may also find that he cannot
control his emotions so he tries to give his mind some constructive,
harmonizing, and unifying suggestion in the form of an ideal or a
philosophy of life. If he can train his mind accordingly, he can himself
establish a balanced mental condition and restore his mind to a normal
state. By so doing, he can remove neurotic conditions and nerve
5 Works, III, 50-51.

61
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
ailments. Hindu psychologists strongly advocate this method. It may
be said, in this connection, that advanced stages of neurotic cases
need external help, encouragement, and inspiration. If employed
with right understanding, this autosuggestion can be powerful in
determining and harmonizing a man’s activities.
By the other method, analysis, the doctor tries to study the
patient’s mind, allowing him to talk freely and give what is called
“free association,” listening carefully to the story, making
observations, and noting all details. In the early days, Janêt hypnotized
the person to bring out the hidden tendencies of the mind. Freud
also made use of hypnotism, but not finding it efficacious he gave it
up. Hindu teachers consider hypnotism in any form to be positively
harmful. The superimposition of the will of another, no matter how
well-intentioned, weakens the will power of the patient. A man under
hypnotic influence loses initiative and the power of decision, and
the effect is disastrous to mental harmony and balance. One
absolutely needs to develop his own will power if he would be free
from mental disturbances.
Freud’s method was to allow the patient to tell his own life story,
and it is this method which is followed generally by many
psychoanalysts today. Many Freudians are of the opinion that the
mind establishes stability in the process of analysis when the patient
discovers himself and his inner life and tendencies. Others say that
the analyst must make a decision for the patient. When the individual
is encouraged to talk and the hidden complex is discovered, the
analyst often prescribes some helpful suggestion, thought, or
constructive idea. In the study and analysis of cases, analysts often
find that a man cannot fully remember the details of his life and so
they give a little help. In general, it is safe to say that when the
analysis is finished, according to Western psychotherapy, the

62
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
physician or analyst really knows how the patient’s mind is reacting.
Many cases have been helped by this method, which is used
especially for emotional disorders. It is said that many persons gain
a balance of the repressed urges, and conflicts in the mind are also
dissolved automatically by this method.
Cases of emotional disorder due to conflicts and frustrations are
perhaps the most usual types that a psychiatrist is called upon to
treat. Many persons misuse or misdirect their emotions for various
reasons—existing circumstances, misjudgment, error, family
compulsion, social tradition, and many other such causes. They
become dissatisfied with their lives because of changes, loss of
friends, fluctuations in their own financial conditions, death of a
dear one, and even because of the inevitable changes in their own
physical health, such as when youth and vigor are followed by
infirmity and old age. This dissatisfaction causes their minds to
become unsettled, and it is only when the disrupting tendencies can
be brought into balance that the conflict can be removed. Then
functional and nerve diseases caused by the neurotic condition can
be successfully treated.
Analysis can often be useful in determining what should be one’s
vocation in life. Perhaps a man has an idea that he is fitted for some
special work, engineering, for example, yet after taking it up he
becomes dissatisfied. This unrest may create a peculiar mental
condition which in turn develops into a psychosis. He becomes
morose and taciturn and may even begin to show abnormal
tendencies. Through analysis the psychiatrist can find out the true
nature of the man’s mind and the real talents, the natural gifts or
tendencies, that are being repressed. In the light of this understanding,
he can suggest the vocation which will give the needed expression
to the patient’s abilities and bring him satisfaction. When he is doing
the job for which he was really fitted, and which his subconscious

63
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
mind really wanted, the neurotic condition is automatically removed
and a healthy mental state established.
Professor Carl R. Rogers contributes interesting and useful ideas
in the realm of psychotherapy in his book Counseling and
Psychotherapy. He and many others in America advocate insight
by the client as the most effective part of psychotherapy. His use
of the word “counseling” is also well chosen and effective.
According to him and others, the client should be helped by the
counselor to have insight into the cause of the mental disturbance.
Professor Rogers thinks that the client should develop such insight
during the course of counseling and adopt a method of orientation
to life. He says:
The client’s insight tends to develop gradually and proceeds in
general from less to more significant understanding. It involves the
new perception of relationship previously unrecognized, a willing-
ness to accept all aspects of the self and a choice of goals. Follow-
ing these new perceptions of self and this new choice of goals
come self-initiated actions which move toward achieving the new
goals. . . . They create new confidence and independence in the
client.6
Professor Rogers comes to the conclusion that the directive
suggestions in the course of analysis or counseling are not so
successful. They are often incompletely done or rejected.
There have been cases of autognosis in which a person by self-
analysis discovered his own hidden complexes and urges by
examining the incidents of his life. In a sense, it is a reliving of the
life itself. Instead of going to a psychiatrist, some persons (though
only a few) succeed in recognizing their subconscious tendencies
through introspection, and then they themselves try to establish
balance in them. Most of the modern analytical psychiatrists do not
6 Carl R. Rogers, Counseling and Psychotherapy (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.,
1942), p. 216.

64
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
give much recognition to this method. However, it is mentioned by
Dr. William Brown in his book, Science and Personality.
Dr. Karen Horney’s book on Self-analysis should be specially
mentioned. She emphasizes the use of self-analysis as an effective
method of psychotherapy. Her arguments in favor of it are refreshing
and convincing. She says:
But even apart from such blatant reasons, certain gains are beck-
oning to those who are capable of self-analysis which are more
spiritual in character, less tangible, but not less real. These gains
can be summarized as an increase of inner strength and therefore
of self confidence.7
Some psychiatrists believe that neither autognosis nor heterognosis
is sufficient for establishing harmony among conflicting urges and
thereby restoring the normal condition of mind and nerves—
especially Adler, Jung, and some others who realize that mere
knowledge of the subconscious urges and the causes of repression
cannot restore mental balance. The patient needs definite educational
training according to Adler, and religious training according to Jung,
Brown, and others.
The Hindus strongly advocate the method of self-analysis. They
specially emphasize the religious methods of discipline in restoring
a man to mental wholeness. In this form of self-analysis, no doubt,
one discovers his hidden tendencies but he also synthesizes the
mind. According to the Hindu view, not only must one analyze one’s
own self but at the same time one must reconstruct his life. One
must build up a sound philosophy and try to mold his life accordingly.
The practice of concentration is particularly helpful. We observe
that many disintegrated minds are synthesized by the combined
methods of self-analysis and concentration. A mere discovery of
7 Karen Horney, Self-Analysis (London: Kegan Paul: 1942). p. 36.

65
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
mental conflict, by either the Freudian method of psychoanalysis,
Rogers’ insight, or self-analysis, does not integrate the mind. Our
experience proves it is the practice of concentration8 that brings
out hidden mental forces which reconstruct and integrate the whole
mind. We can illustrate the effect of the combined methods of insight
and practice of concentration and cite many cases in which it was
successful. We have also seen persons who were analyzed by
Freudians and others. They had insight and understood the causes
of their mental disturbances, yet they were not capable of synthesizing
their disintegrated minds as they did not have the power of
concentration and unified will. Therefore, the Hindus feel that training
is an essential part of mental orientation. In fact, this training brings
out the latent power in the mind and creates hope and self-
confidence, as we shall discuss in later chapters.
Many psychiatrists give great importance to the analysis and
interpretation of dreams in the understanding of the subconscious.
Freud and his followers lay great emphasis upon this. According to
them, dreams are really created by repressed urges, although these
may only appear symbolically. By understanding and interpreting
the symbols in dreams one can understand the true nature of an
underlying urge as well as its intensity. Some psychotherapeutists
depend upon this method, but when the different schools of applied
psychology try to analyze the symbols in dreams and the basic
causes and principles of neurosis they differ widely and find no
agreement. Freudians trace everything to the sex impulse or conflict
of “life” and “death” urges, while followers of Adler would interpret
the same dream in terms of the urge to power. Professor McDougall
had his own dreams analyzed by authorities of different schools
and found that different causes were attributed to the same dream,
according to the theories advanced by the different psychiatrists.
He said:
8 The practice of concentration will be explained in the chapter on “ Meditation.”

66
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
I conclude then that Freud’s formula for the interpretation of
dreams may be true of some dreams, more especially of some dreams
of neurotics . . . but there is no sufficient ground for trying to force
the interpretation of every dream to fit the formula.9
It is undeniable that many persons find satisfaction and relief
when their difficulties are explained to them in the light of the sex
urge or the urge of self-expression, but it would be unpardonable to
say that either impulse is the key to the whole truth of the nature of
man or that every dream can be interpreted by it alone. What is
true with regard to the understanding of dreams is also applicable
to the other methods of psychoanalysis in general, whatever may
be the name of the particular school and its methods.
Hindu psychologists do not accept the theory that all dreams are
created by causal relationship with past experiences or that they
are determined by repressed urges of sex or self-expression; nor
do they try to explain all dreams in the light of mental repressions,
wish fulfillment, and other such causes. Dreams need not
necessarily be created by inhibitions, repressed conscious or
subconscious urges, or even by impressions from past thoughts and
actions, although it is true that many dreams do come from these
causes. Dreams are not always retrospective. To illustrate this we
can relate dream experiences of some of our intimate friends in the
West. For the sake of authenticity we will relate a few of the most
reliable dreams, which were verified. We are deliberately relating
the cases from American sources.
A friend of ours had a most amazing dream just before the
Vedanta Society of Boston acquired its present building. We had
been negotiating through a real estate company to buy this property,
and one morning we requested our friend, who was interested in
9 William McDougall. Outline of Abnormal Psychology (London: Methuen, 1926),
p. 186.

67
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
the negotiations, to make an offer for the house. She said: “Swami,
if I am to make an offer I shall give the amount of which I dreamt.”
It was almost less than half of the sale price. We felt that the Society
would lose this opportunity to have the place if such an offer were
made. However, our friend insisted on it, and when we went to
Boston the offer was given to the real estate agent. He was vexed
and almost decided to drop the matter without relaying the offer to
the owner. We finally persuaded him to take a check with the offer
to the owner, who would have the choice of refusing it. The next
morning the real estate agent telephoned and told our friend that
her dream was true, as the owner had accepted the offer. The
house was acquired as indicated previously in the dream.
Another friend had an unusual dream of a certain section of
Boston being burned. It was so vivid that she could describe even
the position of the flagpoles and other details of the locality, which
she had never seen in her life. The next morning the newspaper
reported a huge conflagration in Boston, and upon inquiry it was
found that all details of the dream were true.
A friend of ours dreamed of the critical illness of a Swami just
before it occurred. The details of that sickness as well as the process
of recovery shown in the dream were wholly verified by the
developments and later events of the case. We can relate a number
of such progressive dreams about the future which were thoroughly
verified by later events, so it is a mistake to think that dreams are all
causally related and retrospective.
Some dreams are progressive and creative; others, again, give
evidences of spiritual unfoldment. Still others leave tremendous
impressions upon the mind amounting to spiritual joy and realization.
Jung is of the opinion that some dreams are progressive. He relates

68
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
many instances in which they gave knowledge of future events.10
Hindus also believe in the prophetic nature of some dreams—that
they may sometimes give indications or foreshadowings of the future,
as in the cases mentioned above.
Dreams can also be in the form of religious instructions. We
know authentic instances in which men and women received definite
spiritual instructions in a dream. Some have even received initiation
(symbolical names of God and other spiritual practices) from their
spiritual teachers in dreams. The mantras (names of God) which
they received were never known previously to them. These words
constituted completely new knowledge. Other instructions received
in dreams in the form of spiritual practices, methods of work, and
ways of life were unique and uplifting. The contents of such dreams
cannot be traced to any previously experienced events or to any
form of personal or “racial” unconscious, as Professor Jung would
want us to believe. The dreamers have had unique experiences
which cannot be traced to the race in which they were born. Some
did not even know the language or meaning of the mantra (name
of God) until this was later given to them by the teacher. The spiritual
instructions which students or devotees get in dreams indicate not
only their spiritual inspiration but also their prophetic nature. On the
basis of these known experiences we again say that there are many
dreams which do not originate in the unconscious or in physical
disorders.
Apart from the future understanding of ordinary events, there
are dreams, as we explained previously, which are definitely a part
of spiritual realization. Their effect remains permanent and changes
the course of life. Again, some dreams solve many metaphysical
and spiritual problems of life, giving definite and illuminating
knowledge and high emotional satisfaction.
10 Carl G. Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul (London: Kegan Paul, 1935),
chap. I.

69
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
According to modern psychiatrists, man has certain primitive or
primary instincts which must be allowed expression if he is to be
normal and well balanced. However, psychiatrists do not agree on
the relative importance of these urges or which is the most
fundamental or predominant. Freud and his followers interpret the
activities of man in terms of the sex urge, although of late they take
a broader point of view. They try to show that the sex instinct is the
motivating power behind all expression from the simplest forms, as
in the seeking of pleasure, to the greatest achievements in the arts
or other creative activities. Religious experiences to them are but
the sex tendency translated into spiritual emotions. Some even go
so far as to say that the idea of God Himself has its origin in sex.
They analyze a man’s whole nature and mental outlook from this
point of view, feeling that if anything is wrong it can be traced
directly to this fundamental impulse. The repression of the sex urge
is to them unhealthy and dangerous. They declare that it is at the
root of complexes, neuroses, and other unhappy and unbalanced
mental conditions, and even of religious enthusiasm. As we
mentioned in the first chapter, Freud later changed his theory
concerning the primary urge. He came to the conclusion that man’s
activities can be traced to both the “life” and the “death” instincts,
or sex and suicide urges, and that man’s behavior is motivated by
the interaction of these urges. Orthodox Freudians, like Karl A.
Menninger, give an unhappy (almost repugnant) interpretation of
life.11 While we do not agree with this generalization, we do give
credit for many notable achievements in analyzing mental cases
that are suited or responsive to interpretation by the sex impulse.
Yet we make bold to say that they have made unfortunate and
uncalled-for generalizations from some abnormal cases.
11 Karl A. Menninger, Love Against Hatred (London: Harrap, 1942), and Man
Against Himself.

70
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
It is interesting to note that Adler takes a different view from
Freud regarding the fundamental urge in man. It is his belief that
the dominant instinct in man is the urge to power, or self-expression,
and he does not agree that it is the sex urge which lies at the root of
man’s activities. He teaches that man has a strong tendency to
express himself, to exert power, and to crave for the fulfillment of
all his possibilities. When this is denied, thwarted, or repressed,
difficulties are bound to arise. When a man cannot express himself,
when he cannot exert power, or, as in some cases, when he cannot
dominate others, he feels limited, imprisoned, and crushed. Adler
claims that this is the real root of mental unbalance.
It is true that men have a desire for power, often for ruling over
others, and it cannot be denied that there is a strong tendency toward
self-expression in everyone. When this urge is unusually strong and
intense, or when there is not sufficient outlet, the mind does become
dissatisfied and consequently upset; and nerve troubles, complexes,
or other disturbances arise. Yet as we study the whole nature of
man, as we analyze the whole mind scientifically, we do not think
that either the Freudian school or the Adlerian school is really correct.
Each makes a valuable contribution, no doubt, and each is helpful in
certain cases, but they do not go far enough. They arbitrarily
generalize from the study of a few pathological cases, as previously
explained. By observation and careful study we discover that there
are other primary instincts to be reckoned with in the nature of man
besides the sex impulse or the will to power. For instance, there is
the instinct of self-preservation, accompanied by the powerful
emotion of fear. Many human activities are motivated by this urge.
How quickly fear will arise the moment a man thinks his safety is

71
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
threatened or when he suspects that something is about to destroy
him! Many will cling to life on almost any terms, and it is common
knowledge that a sudden panic can transform a cultured, well-
behaved group into a mass of struggling brutes. It is not the sex
urge or the will to power that is always at the root of mental,
disorders. The instinct of self-preservation, too, under certain
conditions, can create difficulties.
In this connection we happened to study a certain case carefully.
It had nothing to do with sex or power urges. A woman developed
a psychogenic neurosis. She was treated by different analysts but
could not be cured, although at times she was helped a little. When
she was a child, certain teachings created an abnormal fear of
punishment as a result of certain wrongdoings. This was impressed
so much on the child’s mind that when she grew up she could not
shake it off. For a long time she lived a fairly successful life in
business and marriage, but owing to changes in the circumstances
of her life her security was threatened. This brought out the old
fear and apprehension which had been forgotten until she was about
thirty years of age. A serious mental and nerve disorder was created,
and the woman had difficulty even in crossing the street without a
companion. She was restored to a normal state by a proper
understanding of the higher values of life and higher nature of man.
With this understanding she found a meaning in life and its utility.
We happen to know that psychoanalysis and general autognosis or
insight did not cure her. Autognosis with the help of creative and
constructive suggestion, as opposed to the destructive and negative
childhood suggestion, was immensely helpful. We had to give her a
sound philosophy of life and emphasize the higher nature of man.
Mental training and exercises gradually began to synthesize her
mind. Steady practice of concentration brought out latent inner

72
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
strength and created self-confidence and conviction; the mind was
reconstructed and normality established.
We know many persons who are afflicted by maladjustment in
the urge of self-preservation and other urges and emotions. We
can cite many cases to prove that all the emotions under certain
conditions can become sources of trouble. After World War I some
eminent scientists, Dr. William Brown and others, observed cases
that had become neurotic—not because of repression of the sex
impulse or need for self-expression, but because of fear complexes.
Some patients were known to have developed psychoses, even
insanity, through fear of war and destruction. Many that were thought
to be cases of shell shock had not actually experienced the shock
but had developed the symptoms from fear of it.
Again, the gregarious instinct in man is strong. Man seeks
companions; he wants to have friends around him. He feels loneliness
when there is no one near. This desire for social relationships is one
of the primary urges, as we explained in the chapter on “Emotion.”
It is not to be identified with the sex instinct, as Freud tried to claim
by having recourse to unwarrantable imagination, nor is it due to
the wish for power or the desire to domineer over others, as Adler
would have us believe. Man wants friends primarily because he
has joy in their company. He does not seek them merely for
protection and the expression of sex or power, but rather for the
exchange of thoughts and emotions to share his ideas and
experiences. The repression or denial of this communal impulse
can often derange a man’s mind. It has been found by observation
that many persons will become mentally unbalanced if left alone
for a long period of time. When people cannot have friends or
companions, when they must live in isolated places such as on a
desert, marooned on an island, or in solitary confinement, they tend

73
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
to become queer and eccentric, if not positively insane. There are
various reasons for this, but the fundamental cause is the repression
of the normal instinct for companionship. There are, of course, some
exceptional persons who do not care for social life owing to an
inner fear, the result of early training by their parents, or because of
other conditions and circumstances; but these are rare cases. There
are also persons who live an intense inner life, not because they
have the selfish nature of an introvert but because of a profound
interest in the realization of higher things—spirituality or truth or
God. Men engaged in scientific research, great spiritual leaders,
scholars, and others of a like nature will prefer to remain alone for
long periods of time. They have deep satisfaction in their pursuits
and do not depend on social contacts for a happy life.
There is also another instinct in man known as the cognitive
instinct. This is the urge to know. Man wants to understand himself
and his surroundings; he wants to analyze and discover the truth
about the things that he sees. He shows this tendency even as a
little child by asking questions and showing interest in the world
about him. He is not satisfied with knowing that a thing exists. He
wants to find out how and why. This cognitive instinct cannot be
interpreted by either the Freudian or the Adlerian theories of primitive
urges. If this impulse is unduly accentuated or is not in harmony
with other mental tendencies, it also can create disorder. For
instance, if a man has only a limited possibility for intellectual
unfoldment yet has developed an abnormal desire for it, he will
create a neurotic condition, just as in the case of other unbalanced
and unsatisfied urges. An abnormal desire for knowledge that is
frustrated can create inferiority and superiority complexes and other
forms of mental disorder.
After studying the interpretation of the subconscious mind as
given by modern Western psychology, it would appear to a

74
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
disinterested person as though the subconscious were considered
more or less as a separate mental force to regulate what the average
person understands as the conscious mind. It would also appear
that the subconscious is the repository of the “dark” forces and
repressed tendencies of man which create abnormalities or neuroses.
Then, too, we find Jung speaking of “race subconscious” which
influences the subconscious of individuals. From this we can gather
that at least some modern psychologists are concluding that the
subconscious mind contains not only the repressed tendencies of
one individual but it is also affected by the repressed tendencies of
those about him.
Hindu psychologists give great stress to inherent tendencies or
past impressions (samskaras), of which the subconscious consists.
These impressions from past thoughts and actions may be of good,
bad, or indifferent quality. They will accordingly remain in what is
known as the subconscious state of mind in the form of tendencies.
They can be revived as memories and can become powerful factors,
determining in many cases the functionings of the conscious state.
To quote Swami Vivekananda:
If a man continuously hears bad words, thinks bad thoughts, does
bad actions, his mind will be full of bad impressions; and they will
influence his thought and work without his being conscious of the
fact . . . he will be like a machine in the hands of his impressions,
and they will force him to do evil. Similarly . . . when a man has
done so much good work and thought so many good thoughts that
there is an irresistible tendency in him to do good, in spite of himself
and even if he wishes to do evil, his mind, as the sum total of his
tendencies, will not allow him to do so; the tendencies will turn him
back; he is completely under the influence of the good tendencies.12
12 Works, I, 52-53.

75
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
The mind of an individual also receives impressions from its
environment and from the company of others. Professor Jung gives
considerable value to the race unconscious.13 He comes to the
conclusion that man’s conscious and unconscious mind is greatly
influenced by the race unconscious. Hindu psychologists not only
teach that the impressions from other minds may be of a passive
nature but also that there may be dynamic influences at work, as
well as the active transference of thought. Throughout the ages,
Hindu teachers have recognized the fact that there is an active
influence exerted by the mind of an individual upon the conscious
and subconscious states of others. They also are aware of the power
of suggestion. To them, the subconscious mind is not merely the
repository of past thoughts and actions but also contains the
impressions that are received consciously or unconsciously from
others. They believe that past impressions may also remain from a
previous life.
According to Hindu teachers, the human mind brings with it
experiences from past existences, for they believe in the theory of
reincarnation.14 Hindu philosophers and psychologists are of the
opinion that the individual soul goes through various stages of life
accumulating experiences and it retains latent possibilities of future
evolution and unfoldment, just as the seed contains the possibilities
of a future tree. Even when the gross body dies, the impressions
(samskaras) of past thoughts and actions are preserved in the subtle
body. Hindu thinkers maintain that the soul has not only a gross
body but also a subtle and a causal body, each performing different
functions. In order to understand these three bodies or sheaths, we
can conceive of a person and his different layers of outer and
13 Carl G. Jung, Integration of Personality, trans. Stanley Dell (London: Kegan
Paul, 1939).
14 References to the theory of reincarnation may be found in the following sources.
Works, I, 239, 318, and 330; Works, II, 218-20, 224-25; and Swami Abhedananda,
Reincarnation (Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math).

76
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
undergarments. Every one of them performs a particular function.
The gross body of the individual soul functions on a gross plane.
The inner instruments (antahkarana-manah, buddhi, ahamkar,
and chitta, as explained in the second chapter), and such other
subtle functionings, are in the subtle body. The causal body consists
of the subtle impressions and the basic consciousness of I-ness
which individualizes the Self. In reincarnation the individual soul
returns to this world in a new gross body with those samskaras as
the basis of what we call tendencies.15 The unconscious mind
contains these impressions. Many of the individual tendencies and
temperaments can be better explained by this viewpoint.
Reincarnation is prolonged by the expression of urges which are
created by the past residuals of thoughts and actions. The cycle of
birth and death ceases to exist only when the whole mind, conscious
and unconscious, is totally unified and ultimately freed from inordinate
longings and urges by complete illumination.
Within the subconscious mind lies the sum total of the experiences,
impressions, and tendencies of an individual; and the quality of its
influence upon the conscious state, as well as upon the minds of
others, will be determined by the quality of these impressions,
according to whether or not they are good, bad, or indifferent.16
But a man need not be a mere creature of his past. The contents of
the subconscious mind created by his own past thoughts and actions,
as well as by the influence of others, can be changed or transformed
by the creating of new samskaras, or impressions.17 By changing
the quality of his mental habits in the present, a man can himself
direct and determine what his future mental state shall be. By
regulating his thoughts and emotions, a man can make for himself
new hope and new possibilities.
15 Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita, trans. Swami Swarupananda (Mayavati, Almora,
Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama, 1933), chap. II:22.
16 Works, I, 52.
17 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali.

77
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
There are many persons in the West who think that Hindu religion
and philosophy are fatalistic. This is far from the truth. Hindu
philosophers and psychologists firmly believe that a man can change
his course of life if he has right understanding and works accordingly,
thereby creating a new set of samskaras, or impressions, by
reorienting his life.

78
C H A P T E R V
Will and Personality
WILL
O
UR emotions, urges, and instincts are inseparably connected
with our volition. We wish to express each one of our emotions.
When the mind becomes active in its totality, we call it “will.” Without
this will we cannot translate our ideas or emotions into action or a
dynamic state. Consequently, even though we may have lofty ideas
and ideals and exalted emotions, they are not effective in our daily
lives. Will is of vital importance to every individual. Sometimes we
find that when there is conflict and confusion in the subconscious
mind the will is not completed. Because of the conflict, urges arise
in one direction and then another with the result that neither a single
urge nor a set of urges has maximum satisfaction. Thus will is
incomplete and loses its power. Few of us realize that our failures
in life are caused by an incomplete will. Generally, the popular
expression is: “This man has no will power.” However, it is a mistake
to think that we do not possess will; rather it has not been integrated
or completed. The mind is split, and so we fail. We cannot achieve
anything unless we have an integrated or unified will. Therefore, its
cultivation is vitally important.
In some cases mental disturbances split the personality wholly.
Such cases are to be treated medically first. Some of us must have
had occasion to notice individuals who often are timid about crossing

79
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
the street. A few years ago, a friend of ours introduced a person to
us who was extremely afraid to go across the street; she was in
such a nervous state that she could not perform her daily activities.
It was a deplorable state, and we know from personal contact with
other cases, and also from the experiences of some of our medical
friends, that there are innumerable similar cases in which an individual
cannot manage even ordinary functions. Generally, such patients
are helped by psychiatrists who can unearth the conflict; when the
conflict is dissolved, the mind is allowed to function properly. The
dynamic side of the mind becomes operative, and the individual can
then carry on normal activities.
That is not all we want, however; we want more in life than the
average person. Average men and women, it is true, can conduct
their ordinary affairs, yet they are utterly helpless in the expression
of their ideals. They pitifully fail to use higher emotions and spiritual
ideals in their lives and actions even though they do not lack
theoretical understanding of religious philosophy. Christians have
studied the teachings of Christ thoroughly, and the followers of other
religions study their respective teachings. We do not believe that
there is a child who does not understand the basic principles of the
teachings of Christ and other great teachers. They all know that
“hatred cannot be conquered by hatred but by love.” All the lofty
principles are known to the people, yet you find that they cannot
make those ideals effective. Why? Because they lack will power.
The will is completely disintegrated, and consequently they cannot
carry out their aims and ideals.
When you observe a child, you realize that he has different ideals
at different times. Sometimes he admires a school teacher,
sometimes a Sunday school teacher, or one of his parents. Again he
admires the other parent and tries to imitate him. The ideals are

80
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
shifting constantly, and because they are not thoroughly operative
in the child’s life his emotions are not integrated. When a person
enters adolescence, if he has not been trained to unify his ideals,
there is a riot of emotions creating conflicts within him. Today, as a
result of this lack of training, adolescent boys and girls are in a bad
state and are unable to put into effect the things they would like to
do. They also lose their balance of mind, as they are easily influenced
by the different persons whom they meet, and remain unsteady and
fickle. For this reason the will must be developed if we want to
have integrated emotions and strong ideals in our lives; otherwise
we will be slaves, not only of our own desires and emotions, but
also of the emotions and wills of other people.
There is a great deal of confusion in the minds of many persons
regarding the very nature of will, and the difference between will
and desire, or wish, is not understood. In a wish there is doubt as to
whether or not it will be fulfilled. I wish to be a wealthy man, but I
am not sure that I can become one. I wish to be a saint, but I am not
quite sure that it is possible for me to become one or, if it is possible,
for me to unify my emotions and translate my ideal into action.
There is this lack of conviction in desire or wish, while the primary
condition of will is conviction. Brown, McDougall, and most of the
psychologists are of the opinion that one must have a dynamic
conviction or faith in one’s self in order to develop the will. Hindu
phychologists declare that the basic quality of will is what they call
shraddha, often translated as “faith.” As Swami Vivekananda says:
The ideal of faith in ourselves is of the greatest help to us. If faith
in ourselves had been more extensively taught and practiced, I am
sure a very large portion of the evils and miseries that we have,
would have vanished. Throughout the history of mankind, if any

81
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
motive power has been more potent than another in the lives of all
great men and women, it is that of faith in themselves. . . . But it is
not selfish faith, because the Vedanta, again, is the doctrine of
Oneness. It means faith in all, because you are all.1
Shraddha is more than faith. It is a conviction of power and the
desire to translate faith into action. When a man has a conviction
that he can express an ideal or emotion, then alone his mind becomes
dynamic. It becomes active in its totality. When there is no conviction
or faith, there is no possibility of unifying the will. Some of us must
have had the experience that when we are learning to drive an
automobile or ride a bicycle we are likely to become nervous if we
see something ahead of us. If we remain calm and have the
conviction that of course we can pass the obstacle, then we go
ahead with no hesitancy. On the other hand, if we do not have the
conviction that we can pass the car in front of us, or go around the
rock, we find invariably that the will weakens and we cannot go
through the experience without agony or nervousness, which often
results in an accident or other difficulties. In order to develop and
complete the will, we must have calmness of mind and conviction.
Unless a man utilizes that conviction or shraddha, there is no
possibility of achieving anything in life.
The man of faith,
Whose heart is devoted,
Whose senses are mastered:
He finds Brahman [God]. . . .
The ignorant, the faithless, the doubter
Goes to his destruction.2
Another simple habit is essential for the development of will. We
often start things because of our conflicting ideas and ideals, divergent
1 Works, II, 299.
2 Bhagavad-Gita, trans. Swami Prabhavananda and Christopher Isherwood
(Hollywood: The Marcel Rodd Co., 1944), p. 68.

82
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
desires and longings. Sometimes, we want to be musicians or
mathematicians; again, when we are with scientific people, we feel
inclined to become scientists; or perhaps we meet a philosopher
and wish to be one, too. For a few days we attend a music school to
study to be a musician, or a Hindu school to become a psychologist
or yogi; and again, we may go to a philosopher to study philosophy.
We do not complete anything; and as a result we dissipate our
energy, our mental powers are wasted, and our will is not stimulated
and unified. One ought to complete an action, whatever it is. Perhaps
you have started cooking. Do not leave the place without finishing
this cooking. If you are baking a cake, finish it. Whether it is a good
cake or a bad cake does not matter; complete it. The mind is peculiar;
once you let it run riot or become jumpy you will find it hard to
control. Another peculiarity of the mind is that it behaves like a
child. You may have observed that a child will often feel its way
and try to find out how far it can go with the mother. If the child
finds that the mother allows a little more margin, he goes still farther;
but the moment discipline is imposed he straightens up. Similarly,
the mind tries to feel its way if it is allowed to do so. Then as soon
as you give it discipline such as: “No, you cannot go; you must
finish this music lesson before you can take up anything else,” you
will find that when you form the habit of completing an act, whether
motivated by a particular urge, emotion, instinct, or idea, it will then
be easier for the mind to complete successive actions. As a result,
the will becomes unified.
Hindu psychologists emphasize purity and one-pointedness of
mind. In order to develop the highest type of will power, a man
must not allow his inordinate emotions to become dominant. He
must cultivate higher principles of ethics, otherwise the body and
mind cannot be pure; moreover, they must be unified and co-

83
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
ordinated. For the most part the mind functions through the nervous
system, so that when the nerves are weak the mind is weak and
flighty. Therefore, the Hindus advocate purity of the body, or nervous
system. We often observe that the body is tired or lazy, energetic or
active, balanced or regulated, or to use Hindu terminology; tamasic,
rajasic, and sattvic. When the body or the nervous system is full
of inertia, the mind also becomes dull. When the body is active, the
mind becomes active. On the other hand, when the body is in a
balanced state, the mind remains peaceful and happy. Of course,
these three states are generally classified according to the
predominance of one or the other. When we say that purity of the
body or nervous system is advocated, we mean that the body should
be kept in a balanced and controlled state, and the extreme dull and
restless states should be overcome. Unless the nervous system is
strengthened, ordinary personalities cannot expect to have strong
minds. However, extraordinary personalities who have reached
integration of mind through the practice of concentration can keep
their will strong and the whole mind unified even if the body is
weak. Hindu psychologists are of the opinion that the vitality must
be conserved by a regulated and controlled life. They also prescribe
a psychological method to strengthen the will.
There are two ways by which the nervous system can be helped.
One is physical, by which certain foods or forms of vitamins are
taken to strengthen the nervous system. This strengthening through
physical means is temporary; for when the mind has emotional
conflicts or unconscious disturbances, the nerves become weak
and shattered in spite of dietetic regulations. You and I often observe
that when we experience violent emotion the nerves are shaken. A
man who is weak or nervous cannot expect to have a dynamic will,
for the mind cannot function in its totality. Consequently, the will is

84
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
split. Therefore, Hindus advise that the emotions first be integrated,
purified, and unified, and inner conflicts be dissolved in order to
strengthen the nerves. When the nerves become strong through
mental purification, the will becomes dynamic.
Our vital force3 generally functions through two central nerve
currents, ida and pingala according to Hindu terminology, or sensory
and motor nerve currents according to modern physiological terms.
When these two nerve currents, sensory and motor, are allowed to
be dissipated, the will becomes weak. The nerve centers and
currents can also be overstimulated and exhausted by extreme
mental conflicts, frustrations, apprehensions, anxieties, and other
such disturbances. The whole nervous system then becomes
shattered, and the functioning of the vital force in the system becomes
extremely weakened. According to Hindu psychologists, mental and
physical energy can be conserved or dissipated as one allows the
vital force to function either effectively or improperly. That is also
one of the reasons that some of the Hindu teachers prescribe certain
forms of rhythmic breathing. Proper breathing exercises relax the
whole body, strengthen the nervous system, and conserve the vital
force. After all, the subtlest form of the expression of vital force in
human physiology is through the respiratory system. When the
respiratory system is regulated, the vital force is conserved. As a
result, the nerves become strengthened; and when the nerves are
strong, the mind is also strong; the mind can function or remain
active in its totality. Consequently, the will is dynamic.
Another important method the Hindus prescribe is the practice
of concentration and meditation. We shall not discuss meditation
elaborately here as it is treated more fully in the following chapter.
However, the practice of concentration makes the mind one-pointed.
When we try to concentrate, we focus the mind on one object and
3 Prana or the entity which gives energy and power to the system.

85
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
do not allow it to waver and go here and there. We discipline the
mind and compel it to think of one thing at a time. Of course, in the
beginning there is a great deal of difficulty in focusing the mind on
one object since we have not formed the habit of thinking of only
one thing for several minutes. We may have been thinking constantly
of different friends or of our children, but the thoughts are successive
and constantly changing; they are not one thought. Even though we
may have lovely ideas and emotions, they are still not unified and
one-pointed when occurring successively. When we think of a child,
we do not focus the mind on one particular aspect but rather on
different aspects of that child. When we think of our friends, we
consider the details of different experiences with them. We seldom
visualize a friend and remain absorbed in one of his particular aspects.
Hindus advise us to focus the mind on one thing for some time. The
result is wonderful; the whole mind and all the mental forces are
converged and integrated. To understand this concentration we can
think of the rays of the sun. When the rays are diffused, we do not
find intensity of heat or light; but when the rays are converged and
focused upon one object, we can even set a fire thereby. Similarly,
in concentration we focus the whole mind; all the functions of mind
are made one-pointed. As a result, it develops into a unified state
and the will is integrated.
In order to integrate the will and make the mind one-pointed,
another important factor must be considered. We must have an
ideal to follow, a unified ideal. When we have that ideal or higher
value of life, if the mental states can operate under it, then the
mental forces are integrated and conflicts gradually dissolve. The
will becomes active in its totality. Take, for instance, the national
heroes. They have one ideal, and under it they organize their entire

86
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
lives. All their mental forces are utilized in that particular service,
resulting in great potentiality for action. A man may also be very
destructive when all his forces are directed into one channel.
We observe today, in studying the political history of the world,
that there are persons who can put their ideals and urges into effect
because their minds are unified. If you have national ideals or family
ideals as the organizing factor in your life, there will be invariable
conflict with other factors. Mere nationalism as an ideal cannot be
constructive and synthesizing for humanity at large even though
that ideal can unify a man’s emotions and make his will dynamic.
That kind of unified will is not conducive to human happiness. A
family ideal or national ideal as an integrating force can, no doubt,
unify mental states yet it always creates conflict among individuals,
families, or nations resulting in feud, conflict, confusion, war, and
destruction. The pages of the world’s history are full of such discord
and disturbance ultimately leading men, who have integrated the
will with those ideals, to extreme forms of unhappiness and
destruction. Such narrow and limited ideals cannot create a healthy
state of mind.
The Hindu psychologists and some of the Western psychologists
advise us to take the universal ideal, or ideal of God, as the
constructive factor in developing the will. When God is taken as the
unifying factor, the integrating element, or the ideal of life, all
emotions, thought processes, and mental states are unified; the
integrated will then operates only for the good and happiness of all
and not for the destruction or conflict of anyone. All the different
families and nations can be unified in the universal existence of
God with the knowledge that they all are veritable manifestations
of the Absolute, or children of God. When a person takes up this

87
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
universal ideal as the highest value of life, he spontaneously removes
the cause of conflict by eliminating divergence of interest among
individuals and groups and by unifying all in God. Personal ambitions
and interests are subordinated and harmonized for the good and
happiness of all. For this reason, the practice of concentrating on
an ideal is the best way to bring out the hidden power that we
possess. This point will be more elaborately discussed in the later
chapters.
Extrasensory perceptions of various types are attained by the
unified will; in fact, mystic experiences and superconscious
realizations can be had only when the will is integrated. We also
know that the unified will has a tremendous influence on the body.
Hindu psychology explains how the involuntary actions of the body
can be controlled by the developed will. It has been proved by many
persons in India that the involuntary actions of muscles can be kept
under control, and we know people who have achieved unusual
control over the elementary functionings of the human body. There
are persons who can also change the rhythm and tempo of the
circulatory system with mental control. Human appetites, such as
hunger and thirst, can be appeased by the will; in fact, physical
ailments can also be removed. We often hear of mental healing. It
is true that there are many fraudulent cases, yet there are also
many authentic cases of mental healing all over the world. They
are often known in the West as miracles. Dr. Alexis Carrel has
recorded some of these miraculous cases, and we, too, have
witnessed such happenings. We also know that some persons with
tremendous will power can control even the laws of nature. This
factor will be discussed in the chapter on the effect of “Meditation.”
It is well known to the Christian world that St. Francis of Assisi
developed stigmata. The real explanation is that St. Francis wholly

88
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
unified his mind in Christ in such an intensive way that he even
physically identified himself with Christ. There are many incidents
in the life of St. Francis which are direct results of integrated will.
We have heard of a nun in Bavaria, Germany, who also developed
certain physical characteristics of Christ. We are also told that
another nun in Rome shows bodily symptoms every Good Friday.
These can be explained by the understanding of the higher laws of
mind.
When we study the life of Sri Ramakrishna of India (1836-1886),
we find many facts regarding the occurrences of physical variations
as he changed his mental states. Many definite physical changes of
voluntary and involuntary functions of his body took place at different
times.
S U G G E S T I O N
The development of will has a close connection with the
transference of thought. Human beings are gregarious. We live in
society; we are constantly influenced by one another; and we give
suggestions directly and indirectly to one another most of the time.
There are two types of suggestions. One is suggestion through
reason and logic, as we find when we read certain books. In certain
philosophies we follow the thinking process and the thought current
logically step by step. We appreciate and absorb some of the ideas
and ideals, and the suggestions are taken rationally. Then there are
suggestions which are nonrational and nondeliberate. Take, for
instance, the suggestions that are often given to us by our neighbors
in the course of our conversations. They may tell us stories of ghosts
or obsessions, and our conscious mind does not accept them but
rather ridicules them. Yet the unconscious mind accepts the
4 Swami Saradananda, Sri Sri Ramakrishna Lilaprasanga, Vol. II, Sadhakabhava
(Calcutta: Udbohan Office), chap. 14.

89
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
suggestion; and when we are in a lonely place or in a dark house,
that idea arises and makes us afraid of something. This fear arises
because the unconscious mind, at some time or other, nonrationally
accepted certain suggestions and absorbed them. The unconscious
mind is carrying out those suggestions. Often our well-meaning
parents discourage us from doing certain things. “John, you and
Mary should not go out in the dark night” is a negative idea, although
John and Mary may not realize it. They unconsciously preserve
that idea and in the darkness they feel a kind of nervousness. The
suggestions concerning disease are deplorable. Nowadays,
symptoms of certain diseases are discussed in newspapers,
magazines, and other publications. Yet some of the symptoms are
common to other diseases. For instance, take stomach disorders.
Such ailments can result from hyperacidity and from nervousness;
for when the nervous system is agitated and disturbed, it can cause
a certain form of stomach disorder. Difficulties arise if something is
eaten which is not suitable to the digestion of a person, or if he eats
something when he is exhausted or emotionally upset. Sometimes
symptoms may be due to an ulcer or malignant growth. When a
person reads about symptoms of malignancy he thinks: “Perhaps I
have a growth in my stomach.” A fear obsesses him, and this very
obsession disturbs the nervous system, creating a neurotic condition.
We know of many such cases. Many of the psychoneuroses arise
from false apprehension or fear, while the basis of the fear is
nonrational and indirect suggestion.
Direct and indirect suggestion may be constructive or destructive,
positive or negative. In a constructive suggestion we may receive
the idea, in a direct logical process or even in direct conversation,
that it is good to be loving. Perhaps in direct conversation some
people have given us examples, and the unconscious mind conserves

90
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
the idea that love conquers hatred. We do not have to read scriptures
or go through all the teachings of logic to reach that conclusion.
The mind accepts the suggestion. If I have a conviction that yes,
love really conquers hatred, then when the occasion arises I shall
try to practice it even unconsciously. On the other hand, as the
result of negative or destructive suggestion there is hatred toward
other races. Not long ago many of the people in this country
associated a Chinese with laundries or restaurants; such a man
was thought to be merely fit for laundry or restaurant work. People
never realized that a Chinese could become a military genius,
philosopher, industrialist, or banker. They thought that those qualities
were the exclusive property of certain races and groups of people.
Even now children are often given these ideas and actually believe
they are true. Therefore, when they grow up these negative qualities
are expressed. The disturbances between Jews and Christians are
an instance. You will find negative ideas are often expressed directly
or indirectly by parents; and the children imbibe those ideas and
express them, too, even when they become adults, thinking that it is
good to do something unkind to the other group—Christian or Jewish.
These negative ideas are accepted, providing there is a certain
amount of faith in them.
It will not be out of place to say here that Christian Science and
New Thought groups often use the method of suggestion for
treatment of their students. Whether scientific minds can accept
the philosophy of these groups or not, it is true that in many cases
this method has a certain ameliorating effect. Considerable influence
from Hindu psychology is noticed in these groups. It is known to us
that some of their leading members attended the lectures and classes
of Swami Vivekananda in New York City during the nineties of the
last century. We are also informed that Mrs. Eddy, the founder of
Christian Science, acknowledged her indebtedness to the teachings

91
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
of the Bhagavad-Gita in one of the early editions of Science and
Health.5 We do not imply that the leading personalities of the
Christian Science and New Thought movements thoroughly and
consistently adopted the Hindu philosophical and psychological
systems. They only adapted certain ideas to their own plan of
philosophy and practices.
H Y P N O S I S
There are also methods of giving constructive and destructive
deliberate suggestions such as hypnosis. Hypnosis is nothing but a
conscious and deliberate suggestion given to a person who will accept
and believe it. Both in ordinary suggestion as well as hypnotic
suggestion there is one important factor—the attitude of the mind
which receives the suggestion. Whether we call it deliberate
suggestion or hypnosis does not make any difference. The mind
must be in a mood to accept it, consciously or unconsciously.
Sometimes we hear someone say that he can interest a person in
an idea. A man may say: “You cannot influence me”; but in two
minutes he is intrigued. He receives the suggestion because there
is a belief in the possibility of his being influenced.
Freud and a number of the Western psychologists think that there
must be a “transference” between a person who gives a suggestion
and the person who receives it. Treatment by suggestion is
extensively used by psychiatrists, and they believe that there is a
transference between the doctor and the patient. Transference
means a relationship between the person giving the suggestion and
the one receiving it. It is often regarded as a transference of old,
5 Mary Baker Eddy, Science and Health, (24th ed.; 1886), chap. 8, especially p.
259. cited by Swami Abhedananda, Christian Science and Vedanta, (7th ed.; San
Francisco: Vedanta Ashrama, 1902), pp. 2-3.

92
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
strong, deep-rooted, and unexpressed emotion, although it might
have been even in the unconscious realm.
In spiritual life there must be more than just a relationship; there
must be real obedience, devotion, and love on the part of the student
for the person who is giving the suggestion and training. Then it
becomes dynamic and operative. Both Brown and McDougall differ
from the Freudian interpretation of libido in this respect: their opinion
is that the libidinal urge is not responsible for the receipt of suggestion,
but it is the spirit of submission instead which allows the mind to
receive suggestion. Both of these great psychologists and many
others believe that there is an inherent tendency in man to submit to
others and that it is one of the primitive urges of man. In fact,
society cannot operate unless there is such a tendency in human
beings. We cannot learn anything from our teachers, whether in
college or in Sunday school, unless we have the spirit of submission
or receptivity. Sometimes our young people resent the use of the
word submission; they become offended lest their ego is being
slighted. But the fact remains that without the attitude of receiving
something from others we cannot learn anything in the world,
whether it is intellectual, moral, spiritual, or any other type of
knowledge. Therefore, there is a need of this submissive spirit.
Hindus say that suggestions become active and dynamic only when
there is a deep feeling or relationship between the person who gives
suggestion and the person who receives it. If there is no point of
contact emotionally, there will be no avenue of suggestion. The
modern psychiatrist should observe this factor when he uses the
method of suggestion. Although mere release of old unexpressed
emotion and its transference to another person may bring relief to
an individual, we believe that it cannot help in building up a
personality.
Today, hypnotic practices have become more or less obsolete.

93
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
Charcot, Janêt, and others used them to cure cases of neuroses or
mental disturbances. Freud practiced this method in his earlier days
until he developed psychoanalysis. Some psychiatrists still use
hypnosis for the training of the memory process, but as a method of
education it is not very good and should not be encouraged. The
reason is clear. In hypnosis, the will of the person is kept in abeyance.
He receives the suggestion from the hypnotizer and does not allow
his own mind to function. The suggestion may be given to him:
“You are shivering” or “You are sleeping,” and it is allowed to go on
to its maximum functioning at the cost of his own thinking or feeling.
The person’s mind is suspended from operation and the effect is
deplorable. A man may say that he has cured a few obsessions or
discovered some of the subconscious processes but, at the same
time, he has greatly weakened the mind of the individual he has
treated. It is true that once a person is hypnotized the effect remains
for a long time. We are acquainted with some persons who have
been hypnotized and know that the effect lasted for many years.
Their nervous systems were weakened; their minds became passive
and negative; and they were receptive to any suggestion or idea
given to them. For instance, if someone said to any one of them:
“You cannot do anything so how will you learn this?” or “You should
not be allowed to go out alone,” the individual would receive those
negative ideas and feel that he was good for nothing. He would
also think: “Perhaps what this man says is true; I have no possibility
of doing something constructive or creative.” We have known cases
where such negative attitudes persisted for a long period of time
because of the effect of hypnosis or similar suggestions. We also
have observed that some of them often develop a kind of obstinate
attitude and superiority complex later on to overcome the sense of

94
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
inferiority. Some also try to show off by opposing anything that is
discussed with a contrary point of view. In fact, they reveal signs of
extremely unusual tendencies which they never had until the
hypnosis. The whole nervous system is shattered; therefore, hypnosis
should not be encouraged even though it might appear that we can
help the person to do good things. Temporary success should not
encourage one to weaken permanently the will of any individual.
Coué, the French exponent of the theory of suggestion in
psychotherapy, feels that in treatment by suggestion the client should
not be allowed to use the will. He seems to feel that it creates
conflict between suggestion and effort. However, the client fails to
integrate his emotions, not because there is conflict between
suggestion and will but rather because the will is incomplete. Brown,
too, feels that the will must be allowed to function in its entirety. We
also strongly advocate the complete functioning of the will in order
to dissolve the conflict between emotions, primitive urges, and higher
ideals and philosophy of life.
Hindu psychology is definitely against hypnotism, and although
some of the teachers have developed elaborate methods of bashi
karan hypnotism, or thought transference, they are always
discouraged in this practice. As Swami Vivekananda says:
The so-called hypnotic suggestion can only act upon a weak mind.
And until the operator, by means of fixed gaze or otherwise, has
succeeded in putting the mind of the subject in a sort of passive,
morbid condition, his suggestions never work.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  
Every attempt at control which is not voluntary, not with the
controller’s own mind, is not only disastrous, but it defeats the end.
The goal of each soul is freedom, mastery,—freedom from the
slavery of matter and thought, mastery of external and internal
nature. Instead of leading towards that, every will-current from
another, in whatever form it comes, either as direct control of organs,

95
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
or as forcing to control them while under a morbid condition, only
rivets one link more to the already existing heavy chain of bondage
of past thoughts, past superstitions. Therefore, beware how you
allow yourselves to be acted upon by others. Beware how you
unknowingly bring another to ruin. True, some succeed in doing
good to many for a time, by giving a new trend to their propensities,
but at the same time, they bring ruin to millions by the unconscious
suggestions they throw around, rousing in men and women that
morbid, passive, hypnotic condition which makes them almost
soulless at last. Whosoever, therefore, asks any one to believe blindly,
or drags people behind him by the controlling power of his superior
will, does an injury to humanity, though he may not intend it.
Therefore, use your own minds, control body and mind yourselves,
remember that until you are a diseased person, no extraneous will
can work upon you . . . beware of everything that takes away your
freedom. Know that it is dangerous, and avoid it by all the means in
your power.6
Suspension of the voluntary functioning of the mind is always
detrimental for the unification and integration of the will. Not only is
hypnotic control positively harmful because the normal functioning
of the mind is suspended, but it has also been found through
experiment and study of drug addicts and habitual drunkards that
they lose their will power, too; it is temporarily suspended while
they remain under the influence of drugs or liquor. Then, as the
habit of suspending the voluntary activities of the mind is formed,
the will of such persons is gradually disintegrated, and they become
almost powerless to complete an action at any given time.
Consequently, they fail to succeed in anything which requires
dynamic will.
One cannot be forced, however, to act under hypnotism if the
action is against his moral susceptibilities. Some outstanding
psychologists, such as William Brown, relate cases in which
6 Works, I, 172-73.

96
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
individuals have refused to act immorally in spite of their morbid
condition. This proves that part of the mind (unconscious) remains
in a way aware of what is going on, and the person must believe in
the suggestions of the hypnotizer and be willing to accept them in
order to be completely under their influence.
P E R S O N A L I T Y
The problem of personality and development of will go together.
A man cannot have a dynamic personality which affects the lives
of others unless he has an integrated will. It is a peculiar fact that
we cannot manage our own affairs and the affairs of our friends
and relatives unless we have strong will. Let us not confuse strength
with arrogance. People often think that in order to have personality
they must have a kind of arrogance or that they must “bluff” the
world. No, we cannot do it. Arrogance may have been effective in
connection with a few persons. As Lincoln said: “You can fool some
of the people all of the time, and all of the people some of the time,
but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time.” Arrogance is a
limiting element. When we have egotism or arrogance, we separate
ourselves from others. Personality makes us unified. A man who
has personality appeals to all persons, while the arrogant person
can control and use people for only a short time. Moreover, the
activities of an arrogant man will ultimately create discord and
confusion, while the activities of a man of real personality establish
harmony and accord in useful production.
There is a marked difference between individuality and
personality. Individuality is that particular quality which distinguishes
one from the group. A man is short, and that quality of shortness
distinguishes him from others. It may be physical individuality or it

97
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
may be mental, intellectual, emotional, or some other type of
individuality which separates a person from a group. There are
some who confuse individuality with personality. Individuality,
however, makes us limited while personality causes us to expand
and gradually become universal.
We know that there are persons who possess something which
attracts others. What is that attraction? Hindus tell us that our
individual minds are part of the universal mind. As such, we are all
basically connected with one another. Just as our individualized souls
are part of the cosmic soul, so are our minds. Swami Vivekananda
says:
. . . There is a continuity of mind, as the Yogis call it. The mind is
universal. Your mind, my mind, all these little minds, are fragments
of that universal mind, little waves in the ocean; and on account of
this continuity, we can convey our thoughts directly to one another.7
When a mind becomes active in its entirety by the development
of will, it becomes connected with the cosmic existence. If there is
a thought wave in a particular person, the vibrations of that thought
will affect others. If a man of tremendous personality and purity
lives in a cave in a remote corner of the globe and conceives a
dynamic thought, that thought will influence the minds of the people
in other parts of the world. Do we not believe that Jesus Christ was
born about two thousand years ago, that He conceived a few
dynamic thoughts and gave expression to them, and even today the
vibrations are affecting us? Buddha expressed some powerful ideas
about six centuries before Christ, and they are changing the people
even now. We are surprised to note how the dynamic thoughts of
Krishna, Buddha, Christ, and Sri Ramakrishna are affecting the
present world. Sri Ramakrishna practiced religious harmony. His
7 Works, II, 13.

98
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
dynamic thoughts of harmony of religions are transforming people
all over the world, and they are becoming liberal in their understanding
and appreciation of other religions. Instead of denouncing religion
they are accepting it. The writing of Romain Rolland, Professor
Hocking, and others prove that the dynamic ideas of Sri Ramakrishna
have a direct influence on the world. A recent book of Professor
Hocking, Living Religions and World Faith, shows how the
tendencies of the world are progressing. Professor Hocking is a
devout Christian, rather than an agnostic or humanist, and when we
read his book we fully realize how appreciative he is of other
religions.
Our humble experiences with the religious leaders of Rhode
Island, Massachusetts, and other states are extremely happy and
cordial, to say the least. Our good friends Professor Brightman,
Dean Marlatt, Dean Skinner, Dr. Claxton, Professor Johnson,
Professor DeWolf, Dean Knudson, Professor Wach, Rabbi Braude,
Rabbi Bilgray, and many others among the religious leaders and
teachers are so friendly and cordial one would think that we had
been brought up in the same environments. Many more names could
be added to those already mentioned. This definitely proves that
the whole atmosphere is changing radically among the deep thinkers
and devotees. This has been the experience of many in our Order
(the Swamis of the Ramakrishna Order) in the West. Not only in
America but also in Europe the same has been found to be true in
the favorable attitudes of many outstanding intellectualists,
psychologists, rationalists, and scientific members of the universities.
The creating of personality does not lie in physical expressions
but in the unification of mind. St. Francis of Assisi was not an
attractive person so far as physical structure was concerned, nor
was Abraham Lincoln. Yet we find that the thoughts of St. Francis
and other such personalities influence others. Similarly, the ideas of
Lincoln affect people deeply. As long as this country remains in

99
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
existence, the ideal that was declared by Lincoln will be supported,
honored, and appreciated. As long as the human mind has the power
of thinking, the ideal of St. Francis of Assisi, and the thought of
Swami Vivekananda will remain effective. A great scholar of India
once expressed appreciation of Swami Vivekananda, saying that
as long as the sun and the moon remained operative his contributions
to Hindu culture would remain dynamic. This was declared by a
man who was a scholar, not of a liberal school, but of a great
orthodox Hindu school.
It is true that human magnetism lies in the development of the
will and not in the culture of the body. When our emotions are
wholly integrated, then alone the will becomes totally operative.
Every child and every man in the world wants a dynamic, magnetic
personality. Little do we understand that the personality cannot be
developed until we unify the mind and integrate the emotions and
the will. When a man’s character is built with the development of
his total mind, his thoughts, emotions, and will are integrated; the
stamp of his character is found in each one of his actions. A man of
personality is he who lives the ideal and not he who talks about it.
There are many intellectual giants who beautifully explain philosophy,
art, science, and religion. There are many persons who can give
wonderful descriptions of religion and mysticism, yet those talks do
not affect people because those ideals are not lived by the speakers.
Their words may satisfy our intellect; but, on the other hand, the
simple unsophisticated statements of a man of religious experience
change the thought current and life of men, bringing out the inner
perfection of innumerable persons. He does not utter a single word
that he does not live, so his words usher in a new civilization. What
makes the words of Jesus Christ so powerful is the life behind
them. Such are the lives of Krishna, Buddha, and such other
personalities, because their words were magnetized by the integrated
will.
We have seen again and again how a few simple words of great

100
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
spiritual personalities changed the thought current of many
disintegrated and disrupted men and women, who were transformed
by the magnetic touch of such personalities. It was not because
they could discuss theology, philosophy, or science but because they
created an atmosphere of strong spiritual living. Transforming power
was in their very integrated personalities. We remember a man
who came to our monastery to dissuade his older brother from joining
the Order. This man came in a drunken state; in fact, his life was
anything but commendable. When he met one of the leading Swamis
of this Order, who happened to be a man of high spiritual illumination,
he was at first extremely antagonistic and ignoble to him. But that
great spiritual personality, Swami Premananda—who was a disciple
of Sri Ramakrishna—in an affectionate and loving manner addressed
and tried to console him, saying that his brother would be allowed to
return to his home if he chose to do so. Then the Swami gave him
some refreshments to cool him off, as it was a very hot day. This
man had never experienced such kind treatment. In spite of his
abusive behavior, the Swami treated him as if he had known him all
his life and when he was leaving requested him to come again to
the monastery. Such loving treatment impressed the younger brother
so much that he could not forget that magnetic personality. After
that, he frequented the monastery and visited Swami Premananda.
Instead of persuading his brother to leave, he himself finally remained
there and became an ardent follower of the Swami. The influence
of this spiritual leader transformed the man in an unbelievable way
and made a noble personality—in fact, a religious leader—out of
him. It is interesting to note that this transformed man not only lives
an intensely religious life but has become a true servant of mankind,
having built up a large hospital and relief center for the welfare of
suffering humanity. The influence of the great Swami brought out
what was best in him and made him a true servant of man and God.

101
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
We can cite a number of similar cases from the lives of Swami
Vivekananda, Swami Brahmananda, and such others of our
contemporary history. We do not have to cite the cases from the
lives of Krishna, Buddha, Christ, and Sri Ramakrishna. Every
historian knows how full of such instances are the lives of these
incarnate spirits. The strength of such unified personalities lies in
their religious experiences, nay, in their actual living of religion.
Professor Allport very aptly says:
Religion is the search for a value underlying ALL things, and as
such is the most comprehensive of all the possible philosophies of
life. A deeply moving religious experience is not readily forgotten,
but is likely to remain as a focus of thought and desire.8
Therefore, when we want to influence others, when we want to
change others, we must change our own lives by translating our
ideals into dynamic will and consequent action. This is the secret of
human magnetism. Swami Vivekananda says:
. . . The personality of the man is two-thirds, and his intellect, his
words, are but one-third. It is the real man, the personality of the
man, that runs through us. Our actions are but effects; actions must
come when the man is there. . . .
The ideal of all education, all training, should be this manmaking.
But, instead of that, we are always trying to polish up the outside. .
. . The end and aim of all training is to make the man grow. The
man who influences, who throws his magic, as it were, upon his
fellow-beings, is a dynamo of power, and when that man is ready,
he can do anything and everything he likes; that personality put
upon anything will make it work.9
8 Allport, Personality, A Psychological Interpretation, p. 226.
9 Works, II, 15.

102
C H A P T E R V I
Meditation
T
HE dynamic power of human personality cannot be developed
without total integration of the mind. The three aspects of the
human mind—cognition, emotion, and volition—must be unified in
order to bring out all the latent possibilities in man. We already
know that all glorious cultural activities throughout the history of
the world have been directed and achieved by men and women of
concentrated will power.
Hindu psychologists recognize that the will must be integrated
completely and the mind must be made totally active in order to use
all of its mental forces. They have even startled authorities of the
positive sciences with their subjective training of the mind. The late
Sir B. N. Seal, of Calcutta University, has shown how the positive
sciences of the Hindus were developed by men and women with a
thorough training in concentration of the mind.1
The practice of concentration is, no doubt, the kernel of religious
evolution. Without the practice of concentration and meditation, no
man can ever expect to reach the highest state of spiritual evolution.
When we study the lives of the great Christian, Jewish, Hindu,
Buddhist, and Mohammedan mystics, we fully realize that they
1 B. N. Seal, The Positive Sciences of the Ancient Hindus (London: Longmans,
Green & Co., 1915).

103
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
reached the highest spiritual consciousness through development
of the power of concentration.
Apart from the religious and philosophical attainments of man
through the practice of concentration, we also recognize its pragmatic
value in the integration of the human mind and personality. So far
as the dissolution of human conflicts is concerned, a man cannot
successfully dissolve the conflicting emotions of the mind unless he
has developed some power of concentration. It is clearly explained
by the modern Western psychologists and psychiatrists, and also by
the Hindu psychologists, that the human mind is an arena of
conflicting urges and emotions. When a person with a great deal of
emotional disturbance is analyzed by an expert psychiatrist, he may
recognize the nature of the conflict. He may also understand that
unless it is removed there is practically no hope for his mental peace
and happiness. Apart from that, he may also realize that his functional
ailments are produced by mental conflicts and frustration; yet the
struggling person finds himself in an utterly helpless condition to
overcome them in spite of self-analysis and psychoanalysis. We do
know, however, that some persons are helped by these methods,
but a permanent integration is not usually observed in them. The
mind cannot be developed and strengthened by such methods alone,
even when extreme restlessness is temporarily eliminated.
Many persons become attached to both pleasant and unpleasant
experiences. They may doubt that they have attachment to the
disagreeable incidents of life when it would seem natural to prefer
to think of the pleasant things. Unfortunately, however, people do
cling to apprehensions, fears, and other such unpleasant and
disturbing feelings even though they know that their peace of mind
is being destroyed. Their thoughts go on without any control
whatsoever. Consequently, they cannot sleep; they become nervous;

104
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
and then they get many functional ailments in brooding over
apprehensions, fears, anxieties, and unpleasant incidents of life.
Professor William James realized the difficulty of emotional
conflicts. He also recognized the utility of systematic training of the
mind. According to him:
The emotions and excitements due to usual . . . situations are the
usual inciters of the will. But these act discontinuously; and in the
intervals the shallower levels of life tend to close in and shut us off.
Accordingly, the best practical knowers of the human soul have
invented the thing known as methodical ascetic dis cipline to keep
the deeper levels constantly in reach. It is, I believe, admitted that
the disciples of asceticism can reach very high levels of freedom
and power of will.2
Hindus realize the utility of the practice of concentration. So far
as our experience goes with the disturbed conditions of the human
mind, we are entirely convinced that without the practice of
concentration one cannot expect to gather the mental forces which
are already scattered and dissipated by emotional urges and conflicts.
Steady practice of concentration relaxes the mind; the restless
thoughts become single and one-pointed; and then the nervous
system becomes relaxed so that a person can get sleep and rest.
Swami Vivekananda says: “Never say any man is hopeless, because
he only represents a character, a bundle of habits, which can be
checked by new and better ones.”3
Indian psychologists have developed a science of this
concentration. Patanjali, the father of Raja Yoga (applied
psychology), gives us an elaborate treatment of the science of
concentration. He gives eight steps to the perfect state of
concentration (superconsciousness): yama (mental control), niyama
2 William James, “The Energies of Man.” Memories and Studies (London:
Longmans, 1911), p. 251.
3 Works, I, 208.

105
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
(physical regulation and special mental training), asana (posture),
pranayama (breathing exercises), pratyahara (withdrawal of mind
from sense objects), dharana (concentration), dhyana (meditation),
and samadhi (superconsciousness). These are the gradual steps to
be followed in order to reach the goal. It was recognized by James
that “the most venerable ascetic system, and the one whose results
have the most voluminous experimental corroboration, is undoubtedly
the Yoga system in Hindustan.”4 According to Patanjali, a man must
practice concentration systematically by focusing the mind on one
object in order to unify his mental forces.5 In the beginning, of course,
it may take a little time to achieve the desired power of concentration,
as the mind has already been scattered. Swami Brahmananda says:
By regular practice it [the mind] can be quieted and brought
under restraint. . . . In the beginning meditation proves very difficult
and dry. But if you persist, as in the taking of a medicine, you will
find in it a perennial source of joy, pure and unalloyed.6
It is also said in the Bhagavad-Gita that the mind is restless, no
doubt, and hard to subdue. But it can be brought under control by
constant practice, and by the exercise of dispassion.7
Ancient and modern Indian psychologists agree that even though
the practice of concentration is difficult, it can be achieved by
everyone through systematic practices. In the beginning we are to
take certain concrete objects for the purpose of concentration. As
our minds are attracted by the objective world, our sense organs
and instruments are also constituted in such a way as to be constantly
4 James, Memories and Studies, p. 251.
5 The system of Patanjali is based on certain conceptions in the Sankhya system
of Hindu thought.
6 Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda (2nd ed.; Mylapore. Madras: Sri
Ramakrishna Math, 1933), p. 100.
7 Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita VI:35.

106
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
outgoing.8 Therefore, the mind is being constantly supplied with
new sensations and experiences, and it remains jumpy and extremely
restless because of the influx of new materials and subsequent
mental reactions.9 Moreover, we have already accumulated the
residuals of our past experiences in the subconscious region. They
are constantly operative in the subconscious and also try to force
themselves up to the conscious plane. The result is that the mind
behaves like a monkey, as Swami Vivekananda so beautifully
illustrated in his Raja Yoga.10
The nervous system is also extremely agitated because of restless
states of the mind. Until it attains higher states of consciousness,
the mind functions almost entirely through the nervous system. When
the nervous system is affected, the mind is also affected, and vice
versa. So the Hindu psychologists prescribe two steps preliminary
to mental concentration—yama (ethical observation and mental
control) and niyama (physical cleansing and dietetic restrictions
etc. and certain mental training).11 Non-killing, truthfulness, non-
stealing, continence, internal and external purification, contentment,
and self-control constitute yama and niyama.12 In the beginning,
one should try to cleanse the mind and body through proper
purificatory processes. The nervous system can be made stronger
by certain, simple dietetic regulations. We all know that when we
take a stimulant or drug, our systems are either overstimulated or
made dull. On the other hand, when we take soothing, nutritious,
and wholesome food or liquids, the nervous system and the whole
body remain quiet. A certain amount of simple regulation about food
8 Katha Upanishad 4:1.
9 Gita II:62-68.
10 Works, I, 174.
11 Ibid., 137.
12 Ibid., 260-61.

107
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
and drink is helpful in the beginning of the practice of concentration,
so that the mind and nervous system may not be overstimulated
and excited or deadened and made dull. The mental cleansing is
even more important than the physical cleansing. Unfortunately,
experience has demonstrated that when physical improvement is
overemphasized, man often neglects mental health and, above all,
spiritual development. As a result, the Hatha Yogis developed the
culture of physical power as well as some of the extraordinary
psychic and occult powers; and, unfortunately, many of them
neglected and ignored spiritual development. We also observe in
many groups in America, and in other places, that when people
become extremely interested in physical development they often
become faddists at the cost of real mental health and spiritual growth.
Swami Vivekananda was in favor of the middle path with just the
simple observation of physical health.13
Professor James seemed to be convinced that certain mental
and physical exercises are useful for the total development of the
mind. He describes a case in “The Energies of Man” and tells that
a friend of his went through certain Hindu yoga disciplines which
had a wonderful effect.14
Inner cleansing is of vital importance so far as mental integration
and the practice of concentration is concerned. We know that the
human mind becomes extremely disturbed and agitated by some of
the primitive urges and secondary emotions such as ambition, anger,
hatred, jealousy, and envy. We also know, through our own
observation and experience, that as long as the tendencies of the
inordinate emotions are very strong the mind will remain always
restless. Patanjali, in his first chapter of Aphorisms on Raja Yoga,
prescribes the cultivation of satisfaction and contentment and other
13 Ibid.,136.
14 James, Memories and Studies, p. 253.

108
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
such qualities. He also suggests that when a person expresses an
extreme form of suspicion, jealousy, or hatred he should be advised
to cultivate the opposite tendencies deliberately. Nothing spoils
human peace and happiness more thoroughly than such ill-directed
emotions. We know from the study of different cases that human
lives have been completely ruined by suspicion, hatred, jealousy,
anger, and extreme ambition. Patanjali advocates that a man who
has these tendencies, regardless of the justice of his cause, should
be advised aggressively to cultivate friendliness, generosity, and
affection toward the individuals against whom he has ill feelings. It
may be painful and disagreeable sometimes; yet one must try, at
least subjectively, to create constructive tendencies, for they help
one to curb the restlessness of the mind.
As we struggle to overcome the disturbing conditions of the mind
due to disappointment, frustration, or conflict, we also must cultivate
positively the power of concentration and meditation. It is a peculiar
situation in which most people find themselves. It is almost like a
vicious circle. A man cannot have the proper power of concentration
unless he has, to some extent dissolved the conflicting urges and
the sense of frustration. On the other hand, he cannot overcome
these disturbing elements of the mind unless he tries to achieve the
power of concentration. So one should deliberately try to combine
the process of overcoming conflicts and frustrations with the positive
method of cultivating opposite and higher constructive emotions
together with the steady practice of meditation.
It is desirable that one should try to relax the body when one
practices concentration. The nervous systems of most people are
so tense that even when they try to go to sleep they cannot rest
properly. Physical relaxation is extremely helpful for mental repose,
so the Hindu psychologists advise one to sit in a relaxed position
(asana) and let the whole neuromuscular system loosen up. This

109
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
gradually helps one to relax the entire nervous system at will.
Although it may seem unlikely, experience reveals that this practice
performed in the morning and evening helps the relaxation of the
neuromuscular system at other times. It is also observed that, when
certain exciting causes appear, one can willfully relax the
neuromuscular system and remove the nerve tension and consequent
mental disturbances. We do not mean here that the mind is the
product of the nervous system; but we cannot help recognizing that,
for the time being, the mind is greatly dependent on the nature of
the functioning of the nervous system. There comes a time in the
course of mental development, however, when the mind itself can
wholly control the nervous system.
Rhythmical breathing (pranayama) is also found to be efficacious.
When a person practices it, the nervous system becomes quiet and
the mind becomes calm. Some of the psychologists of India,
particularly the Raja Yogis and Hatha Yogis, advocate a certain
type of breathing exercise for the practice of concentration, although
one should be judicious and careful in taking up certain vigorous
practices in breathing. Some of the vigorous pranayama practices
should be followed only under the direction of a good and expert
teacher and should also be accompanied with certain dietetic
regulations and rigorous mental discipline. Stimulating and deadening
food and drink should be strictly avoided. Otherwise, there is danger
of creating disturbances both in the nervous system and in the mind.
However, simple rhythmical breathing of short duration is found to
be helpful in many cases. We want definitely to make it clear that,
although simple or vigorous breathing exercises are helpful for
relaxation, they are not absolutely necessary for the practice of
concentration.
After practicing relaxation for a few minutes, one should take a
symbol or personal aspect of God on which to focus the mind. In

110
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
the practice of concentration, one should eliminate all thoughts except
that of the particular symbol or aspect of God. One should focus
the entire mind on that particular being or object of concentration
and hold it before the mind as much as possible. In the beginning,
one will observe that the mind runs away to previous thoughts and
to objects of the senses which were previously experienced. One
should try to withdraw the mind from these objects and thoughts
(pratyahara). It is observed that, unfortunately, unpleasant and
disagreeable experiences come to the surface of the mind usually
at that time. That is the very reason Jesus, the Christ, says:
If therefore thou art offering thy gift at the altar, and there
rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee, leave there
thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift.15
Patanjali and other great psychologists of India always emphasize
that one should cultivate a peaceful state of mind by adopting a
sound philosophy of life. As we said previously, one should
deliberately create a pleasant and friendly atmosphere about one’s
self. One must try to overcome hatred, envy, jealousy, and other
such negative feelings, in order to have a peaceful state of mind.
Sound ethical principles are absolutely necessary. As the mind
becomes quiet and relaxed, one can succeed in concentrating it on
the desired object (Ishta). But the mind must be one-pointed
(dharana).
One should not be discouraged and give up the practice of
concentration when it is difficult to hold the mind on God for more
than a few seconds. In the course of practice for a period of months,
one can gain power to hold continuously the thought of the particular
aspect or desired symbol of God. One should ignore the restlessness
of the mind in the beginning. It is but natural that the mind will be
15 Matt. 5:23-24.

111
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
considerably agitated during the first period of the practice of
concentration, as it is still full of subconscious restless tendencies,
conflicts, and disturbances. But experience proves that the mind
becomes steady and peaceful within a short time. Progress depends
upon the intensity of practice.16
The result of the practice of concentration and meditation will
depend upon the choice of the object. Sometimes, we are amused
to note that people advocate focusing the mind on any object
whatsoever in order to develop spiritually. Patanjali describes
elaborately in Raja Yoga the various types of objects of
concentration that are taken up by the pupil for different reasons. If
we concentrate the mind on material particles or material entities,
we can gain the power of concentration, no doubt; yet the result
will be quite different from what we will get in concentrating on an
aspect of God. Man can develop occult, psychic, and other
extraordinary mental powers like levitation, suspension of breath,
emanation of light, thought reading, or thought transference.17
Control of some of the laws of nature can be developed through
concentration on different material objects and other subtle objects.
These types of concentration may satisfy the curiosity of certain
individuals and may also give some kind of power over nature and
people; yet, ultimately, they do not help the integration of the total
personality of a man. A few years ago, a man from India, Khoda
Box, demonstrated the power of not being burnt in the presence of
the Medical Association in London. It was, no doubt, an amazing
and interesting display. We know personally some individuals in India
who have extraordinary powers which seem to overcome what we
call “laws of nature.” But we frankly admit that they have not
succeeded in the integration of their personalities, in spite of this
16 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali I:21-22.
17 Ibid., chap. III.

112
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
unusual display of power. They cannot be regarded as spiritual
persons. We are interested, primarily, in mental development and
spiritual evolution and not in the control of the laws of nature or
display of extraordinary psychic or occult powers.
The Raja Yogis, the great Indian psychologists, warn people
against the display of such powers. Buddha turned out one of his
followers who unconsciously developed some extraordinary powers
which are known commonly as miracles. Many persons in certain
Christian groups become enthusiastic about these miracles because
Jesus performed them. But they do not realize that a man of His
type had the power to remain unaffected by them as He was
established in God-consciousness. He says: “An evil and adulterous
generation seeketh after a sign. . . .”18 Other Hindu authorities also
tell us that extraordinary powers (siddhis) are obstacles to higher
mental and spiritual evolution. Patanjali describes the methods of
developing these powers and then warns that a sincere seeker of
truth must not indulge in such practices.19 Sri Ramakrishna
emphatically discourages the manifestation of these extraordinary
occult and psychic powers. He definitely says that a man cannot
evolve spirtually as long as his mind dwells upon them; moreover,
one becomes degraded in the course of the expression of these
powers. He also says:
Visit not the miracle mongers and the exhibitors of occult pow-
ers. These men are stragglers from the path of truth. Their minds
have become entangled in the meshes of psychic powers which
come in the way of the pilgrim to Brahman [Absolute].20
His great disciples also discouraged every one of us from having
any interest in such practices. We are entirely convinced that one
18 Matt. 12:39.
19 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali, chap. III.
20 Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna (Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1925),
chap. XXXVI:696.

113
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
must be extremely careful in his choice of the object of con-
centration.
When concentration is very deep and the mind does not waver
but remains focused on the object of thought, that is meditation
(dhyana). According to Hindu psychologists, meditation is not
merely a nice thought, a poetic flight, or loose fancies of even pleasant
experiences; it is the depth of concentration in which the mind flows
continuously to an object without any cessation as “oil poured from
one vessel to another.” It is not a succession of many thoughts of
the same object. The mind must not waver whatsoever. So a man
is really meditating when his mind is freed from all other thoughts
and is wholly focused on the object of his concentration.
Methods in the practice of concentration, however, are different
according to various types of mind. There are some psychologists
who advocate the practice of emptying the mind entirely for the
time being. They advise the student to make the mind a vacuum by
eliminating or controlling all thoughts that try to arise. There is,
however, a danger in this form of practice in the beginning. When
one is not strong enough mentally, one may enter into a negative
passive state, and then in that state the subconscious urges can
become operative as all controls and censorships are withdrawn.
Some of the modern groups say that they can get the voice and
direction of God by keeping the mind a vacuum. It is rather risky to
depend on such experiences as being valid. Weaker persons (as
most beginners are) have unintegrated minds that are likely to contain
bubbles of old residuals of past experiences in the subconscious
region, and these may erroneously be regarded as the guidance or
voice of God. This false “guidance” may console us and give us a
kind of self-satisfaction, yet it does not help us to integrate and
strengthen the mind and to have higher spiritual evolution. We do

114
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
not advocate that anyone take up this method in the early stages of
the practice of concentration unless he has a proper guide. It might
be self-deceptive and extremely disappointing in the long run. The
later Buddhistic philosophers, religious teachers, and psychologists
understood the limitation of this form of meditation. Consequently,
they advocated the adoption of the personal aspect of Buddha as
the object of concentration, meditation, worship, adoration, and love.
They also began to use symbols and forms and developed a science
of symbology. However, we admit that there are some highly
intellectual persons in every age who can take up this method even
in the beginning and achieve great success.
The majority of the people should adopt a personal aspect of
God as the object of meditation. It is desirable to take an aspect
that is suitable to the temperament and background of the individual.
If a devout Christian wants to practice concentration, he should
take Jesus or the Madonna as his ideal and concentrate the mind on
one or the other. With a Hindu background, a person can take any
of the Incarnations who are loved by the Hindus. If one is of Jewish
tradition, he should take an aspect of God that is suitable to him
according to his tradition and background. There are some persons
who feel that they are unable to adopt a bodily aspect of God for
their concentration. Sometimes, philosophically speaking, they find
it difficult to accept God as a person with form. There are people
all over the world who feel it almost objectionable to their sense of
dignity to associate the Infinite, the Absolute, with a body and form.
From a rational point of view, we do not find any objection in taking
a physical aspect of God. It is possible to have a conception of the
Absolute as attributeless and beyond time-space relationship, but
the bodily aspect of God is the highest understanding of the
Impersonal by the human mind. That is to say, when the human
mind tries to understand God, it necessarily thinks of Him in terms

115
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
of its experiences. At present, our minds are in a state in which we
cannot conceive or think of a thing that has no name, form, and
attributes and that has no time-space relationship. We are in the
habit of thinking of things that have name, form, and qualities that
are existing in time and space. It is almost impossible to fix the
mind, which is extremely restless at first, on something which cannot
even be conceived by the mind. To illustrate this point, let us think
of electricity. You cannot teach the nature of electricity to a child or
to an average man without pointing to its manifestation in the form
of light, heat, or motion. A man understands electricity when he
sees its power revealed in the lamp, stove, or engine. He does not
understand abstract electricity; therefore, if he has to concentrate
his mind on it, he must think of it in its manifested state as light,
heat, or motion. Similarly, if we are to concentrate on God, the
Absolute, we can do it more easily when we focus the mind on His
manifested state in a visible God, an Incarnation, or a symbol—
sakar and saguna (with form and attributes).
One should be particular in the understanding of the symbol in
order to use it as an object of concentration. It must signify the
universal qualities of God; otherwise, it will not give us the desired
?piritual realization. It may, however, give the power of concentration
and thereby develop occult or psychic powers and other
extraordinary phenomena.
It is convenient to focus the mind on a visible and bodily aspect
of God or an Incarnation and meditate on Him, if we try to direct
our emotions to Him. It is easy and natural for a man to think of a
person whom he loves. A mother does not need to make an effort
to think of her child; a husband or wife does not have to struggle to
think of the wife or husband; a person does not need to discipline

116
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
himself to think of his friend, because there is an emotional pull
toward the friend, as there is toward one’s own child, husband, or
wife. That is the very reason that Patanjali and other Hindu
psychologists, as well as great Christian, Buddhist, Jewish, and other
mystics advocate the cultivation of love for a visible personal aspect
of God.
One can also take God with qualities and attributes yet not with
bodily form (saguna and nirakara). There are many persons in
India and the West who prefer a personal aspect of God yet they
do not care to think of Him with a physical form. They believe that
God has attributes and qualities like “consciousness” and “love”
without form. We can specially mention the personalistic schools of
philosophy in America and Europe, of which the late Professor
Bowne, Professor Brightman, Professor Hocking, and others are
strong advocates, though they may differ in their interpretation of
qualities and attributes. According to Professor Brightman: “God is
a Person supremely conscious, supremely valuable, and supremely
creative, yet limited both by the free choices of other persons and
by restrictions within his own nature.”21
We should make it clear that the Hindu view of the Impersonal
God does not mean that God is not a conscious Being. According to
the Impersonalists or Absolutists of Hindu schools, God is without
attributes and form (nirguna and nirakara), invisible and beyond
the categories of mind— Existence, Consciousness, and Bliss-
Absolute (Satchidananda). He is pure Consciousness Itself, Self-
conscious, and Self-luminous. “Yat Vai Tat Sukham Raso Vai Saha,
Rasam Hyevayam Labdhwanandi Bhavati.” “That One who is
Self-made is verily the joy. Having attained this joy, man becomes
21 Edgar S. Brightman, The Problem of God (New York: The Abingdon Press,
1930), p. 113. For a full treatment of the idea of God see The Problem of God, chap.
VI, and A Philosophy of Religion (New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1940), chaps. V-X.

117
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
blessed. ”22 He is beyond empirical consciousness as understood
by the finite mind and He is beyond mind and speech. “Avam
Manasah Gocharam.” “There goes neither I, nor speech, nor mind.
”23 “ This Atman can never be reached by speech, nor even by
mind. ”24 Sri Sankaracharya and other non-dualists explain that as
It is Absolute Existence, Consciousness, and Bliss; It is beyond
human expression and interpretation. Sri Ramakrishna says: “The
Absolute and Unconditioned cannot be stated in terms of the Relative,
the Conditioned. The Infinite cannot be expressed in terms of the
Finite. ”25 And Swami Vivekananda says: “The Personal God is the
highest reading that can be attained to, of that Impersonal, by the
human intellect.”26 Sri Ramakrishna harmonizes the three apparent
distinct attitudes and interpretations of God as the different aspects
of the same reality: (1) bodily and visible with attributes; (2) invisible
yet with qualities and attributes (as the Personalists of America,
some Hindus and Mohammedans, and others believe); (3) invisible
and beyond qualities and attributes.27 These aspects of the Reality
can be realized by the devotees and seekers of truth in evolutionary
stages through spiritual discipline.
It is important to remember that the development of power
through concentration and meditation and consequent spiritual
evolution depends greatly on the choice of the ideal or Ishta. A
teacher of high spiritual attainment can detect the spiritual
requirements and inherent tendencies of the student and help him in
the choice of an object for meditation. Hindu psychologists and
spiritual teachers emphasize greatly the individual choice of an ideal,
22 Taittiriya Upanishad, Vol. VII, Brahmananda Valli.
23 Kena Upanishad 1:3.
24 Katha Upanishad 6:12.
25 Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna (5th ed.; Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math,
1930), I, 92.
26 Works, I, 376.
27 Gospel, I, 98.

118
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
as no two minds are alike; nor can two minds have identical loving
relationships, and attitudes toward God, even though they have been
brought up in the same tradition and background. It has been found
through experience that different members of the same family have
loving devotion to different aspects of God and live together in
harmony in spite of the divergence. Hindu psychologists, therefore,
emphasize that instructions should be given individually regarding
the object of meditation.
In the vast majority of cases of divine relationship, people have
to cultivate attraction for God by creating a thought of Him. External
and internal worship and the remembrance of ?he incidents in the
lives of divine personalities are chosen to stimulate thoughts of God.
The repetition of the name of God is helpful in the practice of
meditation. The Hindus have developed a science of the name of
God (mantra vidya), as well as a science of worship. A volume
could be written on the technique of mantra alone. However, it
may be said here that different aspects of God are represented by
special names. The aspects, names, and forms are inseparable.
“His manifesting word is Om.” “The repetition of this (Om) and
meditating on its meaning is the way.”28 When a devotee repeats a
particular name of God, that aspect becomes a dominant factor in
his life. The more he repeats the name of God which is suitable for
him, the more he realizes the presence of God. This repetition
definitely establishes a loving relationship between God and the
devotee. It is observed historically that many devotees have reached
higher states of mental development and integration and also spiritual
evolution through repetition of the name of God. It will not be out of
place to repeat here that special instructions are needed in the choice
28 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali I:27-28, and Works, I, 217-20.

119
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
of a particular name of God associated with the particular aspect.
These processes become very effective in establishing higher
emotional relationship with God. Once it is established, concentration
and meditation become spontaneous and enjoyable. One does not
then need to struggle to withdraw the mind from the objective sense
world. The mind naturally flows to God. Swami Brahmananda says:
Remember Him when you eat, when you sit or when you lie
down. If you practice in this way, you will find that when you sit
down to meditate your mind will naturally become absorbed in God.
As your mind becomes absorbed in its meditation, a fountain of joy
will spring forth from within.29
All the religious teachers, the great men of God, admit that there
is an inseparable connection between the individual soul and “over
soul” or God. Yet because our minds are so preoccupied by the
objective experiences of the world and have divergent interests
and conflicts, it is not so easy and natural for most people to feel the
attraction for God. Consequently, the above practices become
extremely helpful in calming the mind, unifying the emotions, and,
ultimately, in establishing a person in meditation.
There are also methods for the gradual training of individuals
who have no inclination to think of a personal God. The great
scientific minds or rationalistic thinkers find it difficult to adopt a
personality on which to concentrate. As Sir Arthur Keith says:
I felt then as I do now that “Lord” is a dangerous word too apt to
assume a human shape, and this shape it did assume in the minds of
my critics. My fellow contributors are happier in their choice; they
speak of “an immortal essence,” “a pervading spiritual force,” “a
29 The Eternal Companion (Hollywood: Vedanta Society of Southern California,
1944), pp. 143-44.

120
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
principle of guiding good,” “a great first cause.” . . . The poet may
be justified in speaking of the universe as God’s visible garment, but
such a God or Creator is one to which science applies an altogether
different nomenclature.30
There are many such persons who find it difficult to take a
personal aspect of God, whether with form or without form, or
“Lord, which is an unhappy one,” according to Sir Arthur. They
have to adopt the impersonal aspect of God, although that Impersonal
Being is beyond the categories of the human mind for the time
being. That is the very reason Swami Vivekananda strongly advised
the use of a symbol or substitute for the Impersonal.31 Unfortunately,
as we explained, our human minds cannot all at once adapt
themselves to an object of meditation which has no quality or attribute
or name and form. Although these persons find it “unhappy” and
difficult to accept intellectually a visible aspect of God, their minds
are not trained enough to go beyond the time-space relationship
and the conditions of name and form. The Unconditioned Being,
the Absolute, cannot be the object of thought and meditation in their
present state of development. As we practice concentration, we
are still cultivating the thought. Therefore, Hindu psychologists
advocate strongly the use of symbols, such as light or universal
sound, to signify the universal qualities of the Impersonal. Sri
Ramakrishna says: “The key to the realization of the Absolute is
with the Divine Person alone, the Saguna Brahman of the
Upanishads, the Personal God of Devotees.”32 When a person is
trained to meditate on the personal aspect of God, he can transcend
the limitations of time, space, and causation and reach the Impersonal;
but it is well-nigh impossible for an average person to focus his
30 Clifton Fadiman (ed.). I Believe (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1939), p. 379.
31 Works, III, 59.
32 Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, I, 105.

121
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
mind on the Impersonal Being, the Absolute, in the beginning of the
practice of concentration and meditation. Many persons may be
well developed intellectually yet, unfortunately, emotionally they are
on the lower step of the ladder. Thus there is a great deal of
confusion in their thinking as well as in their practice of meditation.
Sometimes we find that such people become dissatisfied with
meditation as they can neither accept a personal God as an ideal
nor reach the Impersonal. They seem to be neither “fish nor fowl.”
The solution is for them to realize that, although the Impersonal
may be their ultimate object of meditation, yet, because of the way
they are constituted for the time being, they cannot help but take a
visible aspect of God or symbol of the Impersonal. In course of
time, when they inwardly evolve, they will find that they can then
go beyond the limitations of mind to the Absolute.
Some persons who seem outwardly intellectual are internally very
emotional. Sometimes their emotional life seems frustrated and
dissatisfied. Meditation on the Impersonal would not be helpful to
them. They should be convinced rationally that for psychological
reasons and for the unification of their emotions they ought to direct
their minds to a personal aspect of God. When they achieve stability
through that method, the emotional conflicts are dissolved, the sense
of frustration loses its hold over the mind, and there is great inward
satisfaction. As a result, that individual gradually becomes ready
for meditation on the Impersonal. The religious history of the world
proves to us definitely that there have been persons who started
their spiritual practices and concentration and meditation with the
personal aspect of God and, as they evolved, they gradually reached
the Impersonal. Swami Brahmananda says:

122
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
It is best to start from Dualism. If you proceed a little along this
path, you will find that you are naturally led to Non-dualism. To see
God outside ourselves is a right path. Afterwards you will be able to
see God within yourself. This is the highest form of meditation.33
There are innumerable variations in the mental constitution and
inherent tendencies of people; so, as we have seen, details in the
methods of the practice of concentration and meditation will be
different. That is the very reason that Swami Brahmananda defi-
nitely advocates in his Spiritual Teachings that individual instruc-
tion—or what the Hindus technically call initiation—is absolutely
necessary in India. All Indian books on higher psychology and spiri-
tual instructions emphasize this. Says Swami Brahmananda:
Initiation is necessary because it helps concentration. When you
are initiated you are shown the object upon which the mind is to be
concentrated. You cannot let your mind waver from one thing to
another. If you are not initiated, you have no particular object to
concentrate upon. . . . A grim restlessness is the result. This is most
harmful to an aspirant. Until this state is overcome and replaced by
a peaceful attitude of mind, spiritual realization will ever remain a
distant prospect.34
However, one can take up the practice of concentration and
meditation individually until he meets a person who can give definite
instructions. We are giving a few general ideas here for this purpose.
The best time for practice is the conjunction of day and night—
that is, early in the morning or early in the evening. This may not
always be practical for many Western people as their routine of life
is full of activity. It will be more convenient for them to practice
meditation immediately after awaking from sleep, as that is the time
the mind generally remains quiet. One can practice in the early part
33 Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 154.
34 Ibid., p. 102.

123
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
of the evening or just before retiring. Midday is also considered a
good period for meditation.
One should first freshen one’s self before sitting for meditation.
Then a quiet corner and a special seat should be selected, if possible,
for everyday practice. Regularity in the practice of meditation is of
vital importance. When one practices regularly at a certain hour
each day, it becomes a habit for the mind to be peaceful, particularly
at that time. One can begin with ten-minute periods and gradually
and steadily increase the duration. It should be remembered that an
aspirant must not be overenthusiastic and suddenly start long periods
of practice or sit for varying and irregular lengths of time. People
often get an unfavorable reaction when they become overzealous
for a few days, and they give up the practice of concentration and
meditation altogether. Irregularity both in time and in duration is an
obstacle for the unification of mental life.
The aspirant should relax the whole body at first and sit erect,
keeping the upper part of the body and the spinal column straight. It
is not so essential to sit in a cross-legged position, which strains the
joints, muscles, and ligaments. Proper posture is important, yet one
must not make one’s self uncomfortable so that the mind is distracted
and disturbed. It should always be remembered that meditation is
primarily connected with the mind. Posture and breathing exercises
are only meant to help the mind become quiet.
After relaxing the body and sitting in a proper position, one should
take an aspect or symbol of God, as we previously discussed, and
focus the mind on that, and that alone. The form or symbol should
be visualized inside of one’s self. It is true that some persons find it
convenient to visualize the object of concentration outside, but it is
better to try to think of the ideal as being within. Then as
consciousness of the inner ideal develops, one becomes aware of it

124
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
outside and in other people. In the beginning it is difficult to visualize
the ideal within as we are generally in the habit of experiencing
things objectively. It is good to keep a picture of the particular aspect
of God or a symbol of God in the room or rooms which the aspirant
frequents. The visual impression of the ideal creates a tendency
toward further visualization. This is extremely helpful for the practice
of concentration as it creates a conscious and unconscious thought
form of the ideal. It is also helpful for concentration to repeat the
name of God, especially the name of that aspect on which one
meditates. Swami Brahmananda says:
When you sit in meditation, first think of a blissful divine form.
This will have a soothing effect upon your nerves. Otherwise
meditation will become dry and tedious. Think of the form of your
Chosen Ideal, smiling and full of joy.35
We would like to strike a note of warning so that the aspirant
may not become discouraged when he finds it difficult to visualize
the ideal or feel the presence of God. Sometimes a person thinks
that perhaps another symbol would be better for concentration than
the one already chosen. However, the object should not be changed
for any other until the person is thoroughly established in it and is
ready to make the change. This does not necessarily make one
narrow or bigoted; the aspirant should remember that other objects
and symbols are expressions of the same God or Absolute, even
though a particular aspect ?s suitable for the higher development of
an individual.
It takes six months to a year to feel the effect of steady practice
in the earlier days of psychological training, as the thought forms
have to be changed. It has been noticed that many of the residuals
of past experiences remain in the subconscious region and they
35 The Eternal Companion, p. 127.

125
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
come to the surface and disturb the mind. It is also observed that
some of the subtle impressions from other minds, outside influences,
and negative thought currents often affect a person while he is
struggling to meditate. One must not become discouraged by any
of these influences nor should one consider whether or not he is
progressing. He must continue the practice steadily for some time.
Then he can feel the effect of meditation in mental and physical
relaxation, restfulness, and also in the quality of the meditation itself.
It is observed that higher ethical and spiritual qualities gradually
become manifest in the person who practices concentration and
meditation. Swami Brahmananda’s advice to aspirants is:
Therefore perform a little meditation every day, and never fail to
do it. The nature of the mind is to run away like a restless boy. Drag
it back whenever it seeks to go out, and set it to meditating on God.
If you can continue this struggle for two or three years, you will
find in you a joy unspeakable . . .36
36 Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 100.

126
C H A P T E R V I I
Effect of Meditation
T
HERE are critics of the practice of concentration and meditation
among the religious groups as well as among those who are
outside the field of religion. Some of the religious people seem to
think that it makes one passive and negative. They are almost afraid
of even the name of meditation, thinking that it will take initiative
away from their minds and make them vague or negative. They, no
doubt, advocate doing good to others through social service and
philanthropic work; yet in a peculiar way, they are critical of and
antagonistic to the practice of meditation. We often hear it said that
Occidental people should not follow the so-called Oriental practice
of meditation because it will make them other-worldly and passive.
The implication is that they are aggressive, dynamic, and intellectual
and, therefore, not suited to habits of contemplation. Some persons
even go to the extent of saying that the Occidental mind is fitted
only for scientific methods of observation and experiment, or, in
other words, that the people of the West are best suited to the study
of the objective world in an objective sense.
Professor Jung was appreciative of the effect of the practice of
concentration and meditation in Oriental countries like India and
China, yet it was his opinion that the methods adopted in the Oriental
countries could not be adapted to Occidental types of mind. He
seemed to feel that Occidental people should develop a technique

127
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
of their own. Such an opinion cannot be justified by the study of the
lives and teachings of Oriental and Occidental mystics. St. Teresa
of Avila says:
If you had asked me about meditation, I could have instructed
you and advised anyone to practice it even though they do not pos-
sess the virtues, for this is the first step to obtain them all; it is vital
for all Christians to begin this practice.1
St. Teresa, St. Ignatius, and others emphasized the utility of the
practice of contemplation, concentration, and meditation; and none
of them wearied of advising their followers to take up these methods.
We do not find any fundamental differences between their systems
of practice and those advocated by the Hindu teachers. What
difference we find is between devotional and intellectual types of
mentality rather than between Oriental and Occidental minds. This
difference is observed even within the same group, either Oriental
or Occidental, where there are various mental types, as we shall
see in the chapter on “Methods of Superconscious Experience.”
The critics among the nonreligious groups naturally disregard the
practice of meditation, not because they know anything about its
technique and its real effect, but because in their eyes it is a kind of
mysterious habit as it is practiced by Oriental people. The tendency
to regard meditation as mystifying is, we are afraid, colored by the
achievements of Western science and its application to everyday
life. The objective study of nature, as advocated by Grecian thinkers
and adopted later by European minds, has given man a great deal
of power over the laws of nature and made him successful in the
attainment of pleasure. Without knowing the technique and value
of concentration, these Occidental groups are often afraid even to
1 Way of Perfection (London: Thomas Baker, 1935), p. 91.

128
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
think of it lest they lose their initiative and aggressiveness. Being,
therefore, ignorant on this subject, they naturally fear what they do
not understand.
There is also an erroneous idea that because Orientals generally
practice concentration and meditation they have not attained worldly
success. On the other hand, it is the prevailing impression that
Occidental people, by their objective study of science and material
progress, control physically not only Occidental life but Oriental life
as well. It is not the intention to evaluate here the achievements of
science and its pragmatic value in giving man real happiness and
satisfaction. That is an entirely different question. Yet we are
compelled to refute the unscientific conclusions of scientific thinkers
and some of the religious leaders.
Our answer to the religious leaders is that the practice of
meditation and concentration has been used not only by Oriental
religious groups but also by Occidental religions groups such as the
Christian mystics—St. Bernard, St. Ignatius, St. Teresa, and St.
John of the Cross2—and many ancient and medieval Jewish mystics
of Europe as well as Asia.3 It is needless to say that Meister Eckhart,
Thomas à Kempis, George Fox, John Wesley, and a number of
other recent Christian leaders advocated certain forms of
concentration and meditation.4 It seems to us that it is impossible
for a man to experience God without some form or practice of
meditation. There may be divergence in the practices, yet one has
to control the mind in order to have direct experience of the Ultimate
Reality. One must remove the ego and selfishness to reach the goal
of religion, whatever system one may choose. We know the Hindu
view of the practices of meditation. In fact, everyone has to cleanse
2 Don Cuthbert Butler, Western Mysticism (London: Constable & Co.,
3 Gershom G. Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism (Jerusalem: Schocken
Publishing House, 1941).
4 Rufus M. Jones, Studies in Mystical Religion (London: Macmillan & Co., 1923);
and also Evelyn Underhill, Mysticism (7th ed.; London: Methuen & Co., Ltd., 1918).

129
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
the mind to see God. We read in Theologia Germanica:
“Furthermore, mark ye, that the one Being in whom God and man
are united, standeth free of himself and of all things, and whatever
is in him is there for God’s sake and not for man’s, or the
creature’s.”5 St. Thomas Aquinas says: “Therefore, in order to see
God, there is needed some likeness of God on the part of the visual
power, whereby the intellect is made capable of seeing God.”6
Meditation does not make one passive or negative. On the
contrary, it brings out the dynamic power of the mind. Only a man
of meditation who has direct realization of God can successfully
serve humanity. We have seen time and again that men and women
start social service work with good intentions; yet in the course of
actual performance they lose their high ideals and get mixed up
with ambition, name, fame, and power. The history of religious and
welfare organizations substantiates this observation. On the other
hand, the people who conduct social service activities and at the
same time practice concentration, meditation, and other devotional
exercises can maintain the spirit of service and worship in and through
their work. Some of the greatest men of meditation were the greatest
servants of humanity, such as St. Francis of Assisi of Christian
tradition and Swami Vivekananda of Hindu tradition. Buddha and
his followers strongly advocated the practice of concentration and,
at the same time, they were the people who flooded the ancient
world with social service and unselfish work.
To the rationalistic thinkers we say that they should not come to
any hasty conclusion about the effect of meditation without critical
observation of the technique and its effect on the human mind.
5 Theologia Germanica, trans. Susanna Winkworth (London: Macmillan & Co.,
1874), p. 77.
6 Basic Writings of Saint Thomas Aquinas, ed. by Anton C. Pegis (New York:
Random House, 1944), I, p. 94.

130
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Apart from its religious value, the practice of meditation has a
tremendous influence in building up the total personality of man.
We again mention that it really brings out the dynamic power of the
mind with all its latent possibilities, as we said in the chapter on
“Will and Personality.” The conclusion is almost inevitable that
without meditation the conflicts cannot be removed. Modern
psychotherapy might help one temporarily, but it alone cannot give
sufficient strength and stamina to the mind to ward off the evil
influences of modern life.
It is true that the Occidental countries, with the help of scientific
achievements, have done a great deal for the bettermerit of the
everyday life of man. Yet in the West, because of the restlessness,
unhappiness, and dissatisfaction of the mind, there are constant
conflicts and frustrations resulting in extreme forms of mental
disorders, nerve troubles, and functional ailments. This shows that
the modern ways of life, based on scientific discoveries and their
uses, have not solved the psychological problems of the West. On
the other hand, the problems are becoming more and more
frightening. So the West must find a way out of this dangerous
situation.
It has been suggested by Jung that the Occidental people should
develop a technique of their own for meditation. It is also implied by
him that the minds of the Occidental people are different from those
of the Orientals. On critical examination, we fully understand that
the minds of Occidentals and Orientals are not different. There is
no such thing as an Occidental mind and an Oriental mind.
Psychological study will reveal that the actions and reactions of
both groups are similar. A mother loves her child as intensely in the
Orient as she does in the Occident. Hatred, jealousy, and envy are
not the exclusive qualities of any one group. Intellectual

131
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
achievements are also not to be found in one group alone. Above
all, the spiritual experiences of man are the same in the Eastern
countries as in the Western countries because of the similarity in
mental attitudes and emotional expressions. The emotional devotees
of Oriental countries, like Tulsidas and Mirabai, are similar to St.
Anthony and St. Teresa. The intellectual type of spiritual realizations
of Yajnavalkya, Sankara, and Swami Vivekananda is similar to that
of St. Dionysius, St. Bernard, and Meister Eckhart. The differences
in the type or form of spiritual achievements and realizations are
due to the nature of the mind itself rather than to Oriental or
Occidental habitation. For instance, the spiritual experiences of
devotees approaching God through the emotions with love and
devotion will be similar, but not the same as those of devotees
approaching God through the intellect with reasoning and
ratiocination. Spiritual decline has also occurred in the Eastern and
Western civilizations, and great spiritual personalities have arisen in
both parts of the world to revitalize the people. Buddha, Lao-Tze,
Krishna, Sri Ramakrishna, and others again and again spiritualized
the life of the Oriental countries and saved the people from utter
materialism. Similarly, Christ, St. Francis, St. Bonaventure, and other
great mystics saved the West from complete disintegration. It may
be true that Western scientific and objective methods gave man the
power to remove some of the onslaughts of nature and make him
comfortable, but that does not prove at all that man’s inner nature
has been changed by scientific discoveries and achievements, or
that the mind of a Westerner needs less meditation and religious
exercises for the attainment of spiritual realizations than does the
mind of an Oriental.
Apart from the religious values of the practice of concentration,
there is a great deal of advantage in it so far as the psychological
problems of modern man are concerned. Hindu psychologists
classify mental states into five groups: (1) extreme restlessness, (2)
partial restlessness, (3) dullness, (4) concentrated state, and (5)

132
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
absolute concentration. All the modern psychologists fully realize
that real satisfaction and happiness cannot be attained by a man
unless he has overcome extreme restlessness. As a result, physicians
and also psychotherapeutists greatly appreciate the need for mental
stability in their patients; in fact, they prescribe definite methods for
establishing a stable mind. Dr. Joseph Pratt of Boston, Dr. Carl G.
Jung of Zurich, and many others operate mental clinics to give the
patients mental training in relaxation and thought control. The doctors
clearly relate how cases of physical ailments like toothache,
“hysterical fever,” psoriasis, and other diseases are being cured
purely by psychological methods.7
There is a question in the minds of some of the experimental
psychologists as to whether or not religious zeal and overemphasis
on a religious ideal creates a fear complex and serious conflict. The
real religious attitude cannot create any fear and conflict in the
mind. On the contrary, a proper understanding of the values of
religion removes the causes of fear and conflict. A sound philosophy
helps us in overcoming the extreme restless and also the dull states
of the mind. The practice of concentration creates interest in an
aspect of God and so gradually helps to overcome restlessness.
Sometimes it is argued that this practice of meditation for a few
minutes in the morning and evening would not stabilize a man’s life,
but experience proves that the steady practice of concentration for
months and years does gradually stabilize the mind and creates a
satisfaction which is the objective of psychotherapeutists. We cannot
understand how the mere knowledge of conflicting emotions and of
the causes of frustration can stabilize the mind. On the contrary,
we find that people often get discouraged and disturbed over the
very causes of their conflicts, so it is imperative that their minds be
7 Carl G. Jung, Psychology and Religion (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1938), pp. 10-11.

133
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
trained to achieve at least partial concentration. This method also
clarifies the higher values of life. It is observed that restlessness of
the mind, due to conflict and frustration or any other such difficulty,
creates serious physical disorders. We have observed that when a
man practices concentration and meditation, he gradually overcomes
extreme mental restlessness and spontaneously strengthens the
nervous system, resulting in the proper functioning of the organs.
Even from the therapeutic point of view, the practice of relaxation
and concentration is of great importance, as illustrated by Dr. Joseph
Pratt and his colleagues in the psychological clinic of the Boston
Dispensary. They have proved that the practice of relaxation helps
the patients in overcoming restlessness and eliminating functional
disorders.
It is true that a higher philosophy of life is absolutely necessary
for satisfactory living as it teaches us that all aspirations, hopes, and
desires must be subordinated to the supreme goal of life, as previously
explained. Effective understanding of a higher philosophy of life
makes us see the necessity of regulating our inordinate affections
and ambitions. On the other hand, the practice of relaxation and
concentration is also absolutely essential. We may have philosophy;
we may have theology; we may have religious principles; but they
have to be applied in life individually through discipline, training, and
exercises. History proves that philosophy does not become operative
unless we apply it practically in our everyday life. The practice of
concentration brings out the initiative of the mind so that we can
make our philosophy dynamic. Every child knows that it is wrong to
lie; every child knows that it is wrong to be angry; every man knows
that it is vicious and harmful to be hateful or jealous; and every man
knows that suspicion destroys him and his peace; yet no one can
overcome these lower emotions if he has not the will power to

134
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
apply the principles of religion and philosophy to his emotional
reactions. The practice of concentration unifies the mind, strengthens
the will, and enables one to apply these principles in his human
behavior. Then his social contacts become harmonious, pleasant,
and satisfactory.
We shall see the most important effect of concentration and
meditation in the chapter on “Superconscious Experience.” Suffice
it to say that no person can have real spiritual knowledge or immediate
awareness of God without being established in the methods of
meditation. Mystics and spiritual aspirants may vary in their use of
distinctive methods, yet they are all convinced of their utility.

135
C H A P T E R V I I I
Intuitive Insight
T
HERE is considerable confusion in the understanding of the
intuitive faculty of man. Ordinary people often interpret the
experiences of intuitive understanding as “sensing tilings.” The term
is often used loosely by the vast majority of the people. The real
intuitive faculty is not expressed so easily and it requires considerable
clarification in connection with the practice of meditation.
Intuitive insight is a state in which the mind becomes active in its
totality. The practice of concentration harnesses all the mental
powers and allows their forces to work in one direction. As a result,
the whole mind becomes active and awakened when one achieves
the absolute state of concentration. A man who has succeeded in
attaining this absolute concentration in deep meditation has
knowledge of the entire mind, and his mind becomes transparent
and luminous. He does not need any objective study for the
understanding of the subconscious states nor does he need any
inferential knowledge of the hidden tendencies in the form of modern
psychoanalysis. He detects immediately and directly the accumulated
impressions of the mind that are embedded in the subconscious
region, just as we see things in the showcase. Autognosis becomes
the effect of direct perception. Moreover, there is an understanding
of the total experience of the mind. A man does not then need to go
to any other person for interpretation of his dreams or his behavior

136
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
because he knows directly and immediately the constituent parts of
his own total mind.
Apart from this, the most important achievement of the deep
concentrated state and the highest intuitive insight is the experience
of the Reality behind the objective world. When the rays of the sun
are diffused, we do not get the full power of light or heat. On the
other hand, when all the rays are converged, we get concentrated
light and an intense form of heat. Similarly, when the mental forces
are made restless, we do not understand the mind nor do we
understand anything objectively. In extreme cases of restlessness,
the mind becomes hopelessly inattentive and weak. But when the
mental forces are converged upon one object, all the divergent
elements are unified and the mind becomes extremely powerful.
And that is the very reason that a man of deep meditation knows
his total mind and, through its concentration, has the experience of
Reality. As we observed in the lives of the great spiritual leaders
belonging to different religions, the secret of their achievement lies
in their one-pointedness of mind. They become so absorbed in God
that they often forget even consciousness of the body.
When a man achieves this state of deep concentration, he can
also direct his concentrated mind to other minds and understand
immediately and directly their different states, just as one can see
things objectively in the showcase of a department store. There is
no mystery about understanding the minds of others. It becomes a
fact of experience when a man achieves that concentrated state of
mind. He does not have to interpret the behavior or dream of an
individual in order to understand the cause of his actions nor does
he need any inferential method to understand the subconscious
tendencies of the person. He can know directly the impressions,
however subtle they may be, in the mind of his friend or client. It is
true that every man does not have that complete understanding and

137
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
total use of the mind. The reason is not that it is impossible but
rather that he has not developed absolute concentration of his mind,
which is still being colored by objective experiences. Consequently,
he is still restless. When a man achieves this absolute state of
concentration and thereby his mind becomes colorless and
transparent, then, and then alone, has he the knowledge of his own
mind and also of the minds of others, if he so chooses.
Objective study and inferential knowledge of the contents of the
unconscious mind are rather risky and apt to be unsound because
the observer, in his interpretation of unknown subconscious
impressions, cannot help coloring the interpretation by his own
preconceived impressions and tendencies. Certain behavior may
have different causes. A man may be restless because of his
abnormal ambition, disappointment in friends, or because of his lack
of self-expression, loss of money, failure in intellectual achievement,
or for other reasons. It is but natural that an objective observer is
likely to interpret the cause of restlessness and consequent nerve
disorder through one or another of his own preconceived impressions.
Unless an observer is a man of deep concentration, it is almost
impossible for him to be unbiased. Consequently, he often becomes
a failure in the interpretation of unconscious impressions and
behavior complexes through the use of objective methods of dream
interpretation and Freudian symbology.
The difference between intuitive insight and analytical objective
knowledge should be discussed and evaluated here. Scientists
objectively study the facts of experience through the methods of
observation and experiment. In fact, they follow the method of
“controlled experiment,” as Professor Carlson and others mention,
and find the laws and principles regarding the facts of experience.
Most scientists seem to feel that this is the definite and positive
method of knowledge; every fact is judged by this method. In general,

138
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Professor Carlson and other such materialistic and mechanistic
scientists discard all other forms of knowledge. To them, intuitive
knowledge of various kinds, including religious awareness, is
superstition!1
In our discussion and evaluation of the objective study of mind,2
we found that it is difficult to know its inner workings by inferential
objective study. Analysis of the emotional contents and subconscious
urges is uncertain through objective interpretations of certain outer
experiences. Of course, we do not minimize the importance of the
analytical method and its place in certain areas of life. But it cannot
be taken as the certitude of knowledge in all fields. Intuitive insight
cannot be replaced by an analytical system in immediate and
complete understanding of the mind and the Ultimate Reality. The
inferential method based on objective study is extremely uncertain
and vague. Professor Eddington, in his Philosophy of Physical
Science, aptly comes to the conclusion that scientific knowledge of
the analytical type is relative. Besides, it cannot give the knowledge
of the Absolute which is beyond the categories of time, space, and
causal relationships. It cannot give us knowledge of the “thing in
itself” of philosopher Kant nor can it give us knowledge of the
“Soul of the Universe” of Professor Stromberg. Philosophers like
Kant, Herbert Spencer, and others are right in a sense when they
say that the Ultimate Reality is unknown and unknowable, as it is
beyond analytical empirical knowledge. But in another sense they
are wrong, as the Ultimate Reality is more than unknown and
unknowable; it is the very nature of the soul, of existence. However,
it can be attained through development of intuitive apperception.
Intuition plays a great part in religious experiences and higher phases
of psychology.
1 A. J. Carlson, “Science and the Supernatural,” Scientific Monthly, LIX (August,
1944), 85-95.
2 See Chapter IV, “The Subconscious Mind.”

139
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
Two questions naturally arise here. (1) Can we develop the intuitive
faculty? (2) What is the test of its validity? Let us first consider the
possibility of its development. It is true that some persons have
“hunches” and intuitive understanding at times. A loving mother
often instinctively knows when her child is in danger; she often
does not require any external means of knowing it. Her inner feelings
bespeak the condition of the child. We could give any number of
illustrations, as many people have such experiences.
For instance, a mother told us recently that one night she was
thinking incessantly of her son who was in the Pacific fighting zone,
and she could not take her thoughts away from the boy. During the
night she became very restless about him. She shivered violently
and could not stop in spite of all the bedcovers she had over her.
Suddenly, she felt a luminous presence in the room and heard a
voice say: “Mother, everything is all right.” The next morning she
received a message from the government that her son’s airplane
had been shot down in the Pacific and the boy had been killed.
A prominent doctor reported to us a short while ago that a patient
went to his office and told him that she had been extremely nervous
about her husband that day. A message from Washington that night
informed the doctor that the husband had had an airplane accident
and had been killed.
Every loving soul understands the inner requirements of the
beloved but it has no definite control over these experiences. Every
time a child or husband is in danger, the mother or wife does not
sense it. We may say that these experiences are “chance” and
“coincidence”; they cannot be within the scope of scientific
investigation. We admit that intuitive experiences are not usually
under the control of the average man and woman, and our
explanation is that their minds are not in a concentrated state in

140
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
their ordinary everyday lives. Their minds are distracted and diffused,
thinking successively of all sorts of things with no focus on any one
thing for a period of time. Such minds do not become continuously
and totally active. That is the reason they do not have intuitive insight
as frequently as they would like to have it or should have it. However,
under certain circumstances or conditions their minds do become
totally active temporarily and they suddenly have intuitive knowledge.
We have observed that the intuitive faculties of some people are
developed without concentration. We cannot explain the cases
scientifically; but, according to their belief in the theory of
reincarnation, Hindu thinkers conclude that the intuitive faculties
must have been developed in the previous life.
A person can systematically cultivate this faculty if he thoroughly
practices concentration by learning to withdraw the mind from all
sorts of activities and to focus it on one object regularly. He develops
the power of directing the mind at his will as he chooses. Integration
of will is one of the most important methods of cultivating intuition.
Intuitive insight is fully developed in a man established in meditation,
as we shall see in the next chapter.
Now let us consider the validity of its functioning. Although we
know that there are genuine cases of intuitive insight, we fully realize
that there are many persons who claim that they have it when they
really have not; and they often judge others on this basis. The fact
is that they often misjudge people and do injustice to them on the
basis of this so-called insight and “sensing.” Many of them create a
great deal of trouble, confusion, and disturbance in life. It is unwise
to depend on these hunches as facts unless we can test them
carefully. Valid intuitive insight is present in a person who is
thoroughly integrated and whose will is unified and made entirely
active by being established in higher principles of ethics and practice

141
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
of deep concentration and meditation. When we observe the life of
the individual carefully, then we can test the insight. In fact, we can
safely conclude that the claim of intuitive insight is trustworthy and
dependable only when the mind is unified and made totally active
through training and discipline. Otherwise, an occasional release of
insight may be true at times yet it cannot be trusted or regarded as
valid unless it is verified.

142
C H A P T E R I X
Extrasensory Experiences
M
OST ordinary people and many scientists assume that
conscious and sensuous experiences are the only realities
in the world. However, there are some experiences in human life
which are not connected with immediate sense perception. These
are generally named in various ways. Some of them are called
telepathy, extrasensory perception, miracles, supernatural
phenomena, and mystic or religious experiences. They were not
studied by scientific minds until Professor William James of Harvard
University collected, compiled, and classified some of them as
religious experiences. Most of the psychologists ridiculed these
extraordinary experiences studied by Professor James and often
called them pathological states. We are happy that he collected
these facts for general observation and study in a thoroughgoing
and scientific way. He did not ridicule them nor show any
preconceived notion or prejudice against them. Rather he submitted
them for fair and dispassionate study and investigation.
There are critics of these extraordinary happenings among
religious groups as well as outside them. It is admitted that these
unusual experiences of man cannot be observed objectively as they
are not generally repeated for controlled observation at the
convenience of the investigators. Yet it is the height of folly to ridicule
or condemn them without thorough scientific investigation. There
are a few advanced societies, like the Society for Psychical Research,

143
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
that are trying to investigate some of these phenomena. They have
studied such experiences and have collected some undeniable facts
which fall within the scope of the science of psychology.
We do not mean to say that all the claims of such extraordinary
and extrasensory experiences are valid. There have been many
unjustifiable statements which were not verified and supported by
facts. So we cannot blame anyone for being skeptical and critical
about them. We ourselves are also critical and discourage mystery
mongering. Such indulgence demoralizes and confuses the minds
of the people, and it often makes them gullible and superstitious. As
a rule we do not condemn them, as Professor Carlson would have
us do, but we advocate a critical attitude and openness of mind so
that we can actually find the truth about them. The attitude should
be scientific in all the investigations. Psychology as a science should
also have the true spirit of observation and investigation as expressed
by Professor James and Professor Müller-Freienfels, even though
these experiences cannot be repeated for the purpose of controlled
observation. For that matter, there are many facts in our mental life
which cannot always be objectified, as, for instance, the actual
contents of emotional reactions.
Professor Rhine in his book, New Frontiers of the Mind,
describes some of these extrasensory experiences of man and has
tried to develop a technique for understanding them. He and some
of his colleagues have come to the conclusion that the mind has
certain powers for getting knowledge other than through the usual
nerve reactions. McDougall seems also to be sympathetic to this
system of investigation. It is true that ordinary perceptions are
gathered through the nervous system, but extraordinary experiences
are achieved without direct contact of the sense organs and nervous
system. Yet they have exact and immediate value so far as the
experience is concerned, the same value as if they had been acquired

144
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
through the senses. They are not imaginative and poetic flights but
are of practical value, as they furnish new knowledge of certain
facts. These experiences fall within the range of immediate
knowledge as opposed to inferential knowledge. Although they may
or may not have a connection with religious experiences, many
religious persons who have higher mystic realizations also have these
extrasensory perceptions.
Let us examine a few instances in which such perceptions have
actually taken place. The daughter of a friend of ours, who is a
great medical man and authority in this section of the country, had a
peculiar or extraordinary experience when she was about thirteen
years old. She called her mother one night after she had gone to
bed and reported that she smelled something burning in the house.
The mother made light of the statement and asked the little girl to
go back to bed and rest. After a few minutes the child called again
and insisted that she could smell the burning of flesh. The mother at
once got out of bed and went around the house but found no trace
of fire; so she advised the daughter to go to sleep and told her that
perhaps she had been dreaming. In a short while the girl came out
of her room and insisted that she detected a very strong odor of
something burning, but the mother could do nothing about it. Early
the next morning they received a telephone call from a city about a
hundred miles away, bringing the news that during the previous
night one of the nearest relatives of the mother had been burned
alive by a fire which destroyed the home. This very experience and
other such experiences definitely suggest that a human being can
have direct perception of something that is happening at a distant
place without direct contact through the senses or the nervous
system.

145
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
A friend was sitting with us in our living room and we were both
reading. She suddenly declared: “There will be a death in this house,”
and burst into tears. I told her that I had no indication that I would
die in the near future nor had I any feeling that her daughter or any
of my friends or anyone else would die suddenly. So I tried to console
her. About three days later in the course of our service a man, who
had just played some music, suddenly had a heart attack and died
within a few minutes. This experience of my friend in foreseeing
the death is an undeniable fact which we witnessed and which was
verified by all who attended the service. This same friend, while
staying in India, on one occasion suddenly told me that there would
be a death. She had an immediate experience of that future
happening. After a day or two we received a cable from America
that one of our Swamis, who was a very dear friend of mine, had
passed on. This friend had the same type of experience on another
occasion regarding a death which took place within a short time.
We know of many cases in India in which men and women know
future events, like death or disease, directly and immediately without
coming in direct contact with the occurrence through the nervous
system or senses. There are people in all parts of the world who
are unusually constituted and understand future happenings
immediately and directly even before the occurrence of the incidents.
We know some other cases intimately in America, India, and other
places, the validity of which cannot be denied, as they were verified
by actual events.
Many of us know that thoughts can be transferred to a distant
place. Some persons are emotionally attuned in such a way that
they can transfer their thoughts and emotions to one another without
speaking or being directly in touch with each other. An American
friend of ours often used to tell us that he and his mother were so

146
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
close they did not have to talk or express their thoughts and emotions;
each would know the other’s thoughts and feelings directly and
would act accordingly. Again, we often hear of friends or parents
and children who became aware of sickness, one of the other,
through mental telepathy, even though they may have been in
different places or in separate countries.
In the chapters on “Will and Personality” and “Intuitive Insight”
we described some of the extraordinary powers by which a man
can control the ordinary laws of nature, like the burning quality of
fire; and we know cases of suspension of animation. We also know
of cases of emanation of light and other such powers.1 There is no
need to illustrate these further, although many such events which
were verified could be mentioned. Generally these are regarded by
religious groups as miracles or divine visitations. For instance, the
extraordinary happenings in the life of Jesus, the Christ, are regarded
in Western countries as divine power displayed through Him.
Western devotees often understand these manifestations as miracles
in some of their Christian or Jewish mystics.
Hindu psychologists, like Patanjali and others, discovered laws
of the mind which explain such extraordinary occurrences.
Extrasensory perceptions or occult powers are not miracles nor
are they accidental; they are governed and controlled by subtle
mental laws. Western psychology ridiculing and ignoring these facts
is losing an opportunity of studying some interesting mental
phenomena. Indian psychology, on the other hand, took account of
these extraordinary powers and developed methods by which they
can be experienced and manifested by everyone. It seems to us
that Western psychology is narrow and partial in ignoring and
condemning these phenomena without thorough scientific
investigation. We admit that there are some difficulties in scientific
1 Swami Saradananda, Sri Sri Ramakrishna Lilaprasanga, II.

147
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
investigation, as the methods of development of these extraordinary
powers are quite different from the methods that are adopted by
the physical sciences. The methods that are used both to manifest
and verify such powers are purely subjective and internal. Patanjali
gives an elaborate description of these phenomena and also the
ways in which one can develop them through prescribed methods
of concentration on certain objects. He also explains that some
persons are born with these tendencies and others can cultivate
them by systematic practice.2
It is necessary now to say a word regarding the criticism of
these extraordinary powers. We go to a chemist with chemical
problems, and he has to apply certain methods which are suitable to
the investigation of chemical facts. On the other hand, a biologist
will take up quite a different method for his investigation, while an
astronomer will apply his telescope and other apparatus for the
study of astronomical data. We cannot apply astronomical apparatus
to biology or physics. Similarly, psychological facts can be
investigated only by psychological methods. So Patanjali prescribes
such methods with which to develop mental power. If anyone wants
to investigate these extraordinary powers of extra sensory
experiences, he must come to the same state of development as
the persons who manifest them. Without having the required
mental power it would be impossible for a person to observe
and evaluate properly such subtle displays of extrasensory
perceptions and occult powers. It seems to us the height of folly
on the part of scientists to ridicule these experiences without thorough
investigation. We certainly advocate that the experimenter be
thoroughly trained as well as the person studied, so that we can
have a proper and correct evaluation, just as the jeweler, and not
2 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali, chap. III.

148
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
the grocer, can properly evaluate a jewel. We, too, want to be critical
in our observation.
There are abnormal persons who talk of visions and extraordinary
experiences, but those claimed experiences are mere figments of
their minds. They have delusions and hallucinations about certain
events and also about themselves. People who have delusions and
hallucinations show symptoms of mental disintegration. Their
emotions are not controlled, their nerves are shattered, and they
are much inferior to an average person. A little critical study will
reveal that such persons are abnormal and belong to the department
of psychopathy. Many psychopathic cases have such extraordinary
illusions and hypnotic spells that they seem to live in a dreamland. It
is quite evident that they do not have normal integration of mind,
and their behavior is vitiated by their fancies and imaginary
perceptions. The real criterion is the effect on the character of
the person. If we observe that the claimed experiences have
weakened the personality and demoralized the individual, then these
experiences are mere figments of the imagination.
This does not mean that all extrasensory perceptions are within
the realm of hallucination, however. We can easily differentiate
between hallucinations and actual extrasensory perceptions by a
critical test of the validity of their effects and by a study of the
character of the person involved. The same scientific test will prove
when extrasensory perceptions are valid and when they are only
figments of an unstable mind. In the case of hallucinations no new
information is added to the fund of knowledge. A person who has
them is often confused, while in extrasensory perception new
knowledge of a fact or event is gained.
Patanjali, in his description of the various extrasensory powers
and methods of attaining them, states definitely that they are great
obstacles to higher spiritual experiences and mystic realizations. As

149
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
we have already related, Buddha, Sri Ramakrishna, and others
strongly discouraged the use of occult powers. They also said that
if anyone wants to have higher spiritual realizations he must
discourage preoccupation with extraordinary phenomena, although
these may occur simultaneously with spiritual practices. In fact, we
know intimately that in the course of some intense spiritual practices
one sometimes unconsciously and unintentionally develops these
powers. A real teacher of spiritual life always advises his disciple to
stop their manifestation; otherwise, the mind of the disciple would
be lowered to the level of these powers instead of being lifted to the
divine plane.3
3 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali III:51.

150
C H A P T E R X
The Superconscious State
S
PIRITUAL experiences or superconscious visions, as well as
meditation, are criticized and questioned by some of the religious
groups and scientific thinkers. In the first place, the criticism is that
mystic realizations make one other-worldly and cause him to be
what they call an “introvert;” that is to say, these experiences make
one forget his fellow beings and become self-centered. They seem
to think that the most important fact of religious life is to do good to
others. They advocate what some of them term the “social gospel,”
which is based on the maxim “Love thy neighbor.” They do not
wholly refute the utility of prayers but they advocate that people
should not give much time to them. A man serves God when he
does good to other fellow beings, establishes social justice and
economic stability for all, and removes the evils from society. That
is, indeed, a noble sentiment, but these religious groups and scientific
thinkers miss the real objective of religious life. Jesus gave the first
commandment: “And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength.” And His second commandment was: “Thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyself.”1
Let us not forget that the aim and goal of religion is to know and
experience God or the Ultimate Reality. If any one or any group
1 Mark 12:30 and 31, and Matt. 22:37 and 39.

151
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
ignores the first commandment of Jesus, he is bound to miss the
primary objective of religion. The religious history of the world
proves to us that whenever the persons or groups, especially religious
groups, forget the primary objective of life, they invariably become
social and political in character. In course of time, the original
understanding of even the second commandment changes. The
enthusiasm for social welfare gradually becomes lukewarm and
the fervor dies. Contemporary history emphatically proves it.
The humanists of modern Europe and America deny completely
the meaning of the first commandment and ignore the utility of prayer,
not to speak of meditation. Religious experiences and superconscious
visions are wholly unknown and unthought of by them. It is sufficient
to say that they completely forget the main problem of religious life.
It should be mentioned that, although both scientific and religious
humanists forget that religion must lead one to the knowledge of
the Ultimate Reality or God, they are good people and strongly
advocate ethical living and social welfare. However, we make bold
to say that ethics is not the goal of religion, although one cannot
grow spiritually unless one is thoroughly established in the highest
ethical principles, as explained in the chapter on “Meditation.” Hindu
psychologists and religious leaders are emphatic on this point; they
say that a person cannot be fit to meditate unless he lives an ethical
life, nay, unless he overcomes the causes of mental agitation. The
causes of mental disturbances are the lower tendencies of man—
hatred, envy, jealousy, greed, lust, love of power, egotism, and other
such negative qualities. We advise every critic of Hindu philosophy
and religion to note that a man is not considered fit to discuss higher
spiritual questions and to inquire into the nature of God or Brahman

152
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
unless he is established in shama and dama, internal and external
purification.2
And he who is devoid of proper understanding, thoughtless and
always impure, never attains that goal, and gets into the round of
births and deaths.
    But he who is intelligent, ever pure and with the mind con-
trolled, reaches that goal whence none is born again.3
Ethical living is absolutely necessary for religious experiences
and superconscious vision. We will also see that as a man has these
experiences he grows immensely in higher ethical principles; he
cannot have valid superconscious experiences and be unethical or
nonethical. Moreover, these experiences are far higher than just
ethical living. In fact, a man of superconscious realization is the
veritable embodiment of ethics.
True social service, philanthropic work, and love of neighbor are
practiced and taught by the people who are well established in these
higher experiences and love of God. So the refutations of some
religious groups and scientific thinkers are far from the truth. The
real mystic who has spiritual realizations or superconscious
experiences becomes extremely interested in his fellow beings as
he finds the expression of God in them. A mystic feels the presence
of God everywhere and so he takes a loving interest not only in
human beings but also in other beings. St. Francis of Assisi, after
having his mystic realizations, saw first the presence of God in every
object; and secondly, he could feel universal brotherhood
everywhere. He could even change ferocious animals into gentle
creatures by his loving expressions. Similarly, in India there are
persons who have changed the lives of human beings and other
beings by their very loving expressions which came out of the depth
2 This is explained in Katha Upanishad and other Upanishads; Vedanta Sutra;
Vivekachudamani by Sri Sankaracharya; and Yoga Aphorisms.
3 Katha Upanishad 3:7 and 8.

153
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
of their mystic realizations. Swami Vivekananda, Swami
Brahmananda, and others became the true awakeners of Indian
culture and the true servants of humanity because of their intense
spiritual realizations that brought out their love for humanity. When
you study the lives of Christian, Hindu, Buddhist, and Mohammedan
mystics, and other religious personalities, you will find that the secret
of their loving service lies in the depth of their mystic superconscious
experiences.
Another point of criticism is that these religious experiences only
occur abnormally and pathologically. This criticism has been made
since time immemorial. All of the great spiritual personalities were
at some time or other regarded as pathological. It is true that such
experiences are rare. Ordinary people have no conception of them.
Besides, they are far beyond the scope of the experiences which
were discussed in the previous chapter. These so-called extrasensory
perceptions, including telepathy and occult and psychic powers, are
of a lower type and should not be confused with superconscious
visions and realizations. These extraordinary powers do not give us
the knowledge of the Reality or God and, as such, they have
practically no value in religious research. In fact, as we have explained
in the previous chapter, they often become obstacles. They do,
however, give some information on certain subtle realms of
consciousness, even without having any connection with experiences
of the Ultimate Reality; while, on the other hand, superconscious
visions lead direct to the realization of the Real or God. The average
man cannot understand the superconscious. According to the Gita:
“That which is night to all beings, in that the Self-controlled man
wakes. That in which all beings wake, is night to the Self-seeing
Muni” (man of realization).4 Therefore, God-vision is not abnormal
nor is it created by an insane mentality. Swami Saradananda gives
4 Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita II:69.

154
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
us a critical evaluation of these experiences, showing that those
who have had them are transformed personalities.5 He declares
that the ordinary man cannot experience them without regular
training and steady spiritual practices. These realizations make one
pure and gradually give one infinite joy.
So we find that they are not abnormal, but rather they are
supernormal. In abnormal cases we find that a man’s mind is
disintegrated; his emotions have no harmony; his intellect and
emotions do not co-ordinate; and his actions are incongruous and
inconsistent. In every way abnormal persons are far inferior to
average persons. On the contrary, one who has experienced
superconscious realization attains complete integration of mind; his
emotions are fully controlled; his intellect, emotions, and will are
co-ordinated. In fact, a man cannot have higher superconscious
experiences unless his mind is wholly controlled and disciplined. As
Swami Brahmananda says:
This mind cannot know Him. He is beyond this mortal mind and
far beyond the human intellect. This apparent universe which you
see is within the domain of the mind. The mind is its author, the
mind has conjured it up. It cannot go beyond its own domain.
    Behind the mind of which we are aware is a subtle, spiritual
mind, existing in seed-form. Through contemplation, prayer, and
japam [repetition of the name of God], this mind develops and with
its unfoldment a new vision opens. The aspirant realizes many
spiritual truths. However, this is not the final experience. This subtle
mind also cannot reach God, the Supreme Atman. But it leads you
nearer to Him. At this stage the world loses all its charm for the
aspirant. He remains absorbed in the consciousness of God.
    Next comes samadhi. The experience of samadhi is
indescribable—beyond is and is not. In this blessed experience
5 Swami Saradananda, Sri Sri Ramakrishna Lilaprasanga, II, 44.

155
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
there is neither happiness nor misery, neither light nor darkness. All
is Infinite Being—inexpressible.6
Patanjali emphasizes the practice of controlling the mental states
in his discussion of Raja Yoga. According to him, yoga (state of
union or samadhi) is attained by perfect mental control.7 Swami
Vivekananda was never tired of showing the necessity of mental
control, meaning ultimate transformation rather than repression. He
says:
Most of us make our minds like spoiled children, allowing them
to do whatever they want. Therefore it is necessary that Kriya-
yoga [spiritual exercises] should be constantly practiced, in order
to gain control of the mind, and bring it into subjection. The
obstructions to Yoga [superconscious realization] arise from lack
of control, and cause us pain. They can only be removed by denying
the mind, and holding it in check, through the means of Kriya-yoga.8
The Christian mystics and others also emphatically insist on the
necessity of mental training. According to St. Thomas Aquinas:
This light is required to see the divine essence, not as a likeness
in which God is seen, but as a perfection of the intellect, strengthening
it to see God. Therefore it may be said that this light is not a medium
in which God is seen, but one by which He is seen; and such a
medium does not take away the immediate vision of God.9
St. Teresa says:
Since you do not continue in your work according to your own
personal plans, you need not fear lest your labor be in vain. Observe
what I say, that we are all to strive for Him, because we are not
6 The Eternal Companion, p. 100.
7 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali I:2 and II:2.
8 Works, I, 237.
9 St. Thomas Aquinas, I, 99.

156
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
here for any other purpose. Strive, not for one or two years only,
not even for ten, lest it should appear that we are quitting like
cowards.10
Brother Lawrence also speaks of mental discipline:
I cannot imagine how religious persons can live satisfied without
the practice of the presence of God.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  
Let it be your business to keep the mind in the presence of the
Lord. If it sometimes wander and withdraw itself from Him, do not
much disquiet yourself for that: trouble and disquiet serve rather to
distract the mind than to recollect it; the will must bring it back in
tranquillity.11
It is meaningless to say that these are Oriental ideas alone. They
are common ideas of all deeply spiritual persons who have
superconscious realization. This shows that criticism against
superconscious experiences is not based on facts and is,
consequently, unscientific.
Another objection has been made that these so-called
superconscious experiences are epileptic fits and, consequently,
expressions of abnormalities of mind and body. Our answer is that
in an epileptic fit or swoon a man loses his consciousness, and after
the fit his whole nervous system and mind are affected and made
weaker. It can be said definitely that he does not gain anything in
the seizure and he acquires no new knowledge. The effect is often
the same as from narcotics. On the other hand, a man enters into
the superconscious state as an ordinary person and comes out of it
a better man. His entire personality is transformed; his emotions
are wholly controlled; he is master of himself; his will is extremely
10 Translated by Professor Edgar S. Brightman from Camino de Perfección [The
Way of Perfection] (1881), Cop. XVIII, parts of 1 and 2, p. 57.
11 Brother Lawrence, The Practice of the Presence of God (New York: Fleming H.
Revell Co., 1895), pp. 32 and 35.

157
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
dynamic; he can achieve what he wills to do; and he gains knowledge
which he never previously had. Swami Vivekananda makes it clear
in Raja Yoga that sleep, epileptic seizure, and any such state is
beneath the conscious plane. On the other hand, superconsciousness
is far above it. He says:
What makes the difference? From one state a man comes out
the very same man that he went in, and from another state the man
comes out enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character
changed, his life changed, illumined. These are the two effects.
Now the effects being different, the causes must be different. As
this illumination with which a man comes back from Samadhi is
much higher than can be got from unconsciousness, or much higher
than can be got by reasoning in a conscious state, it must therefore
be super-consciousness, and Samadhi is called the super-conscious
state.12
It is interesting to note what St. Teresa of Avila had to say in this
connection. She emphatically answers the critics of all ages. She
says:
If a vision were a mere product of one’s own mind . . . it would
be like the experience of a person who tried to put himself to sleep
yet stays awake, because sleep has not come. He yearns for it, . .
. he gets drowsy, he tries his best, and occasionally he seems to
have accomplished something. But if it is not true sleep, it will not
refresh him nor give strength to his head. In fact, it may leave him
dizzier. It is the same way, to some extent, in the case of the soul.
[If the vision were a product of the mind’s effort], the soul would
remain confused, not sustained and strengthened, but tired and
disgusted. But in the real vision, it is impossible to exaggerate the
riches of the soul and the health and comfort of the body which
remain after the experience. . . . I resorted to this and other reasoning,
12 Works, I, 181.

158
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
when they told me that it was a devil [that gave me my visions], and
that they were mere fancies— however often I experienced them,
and I cited illustrative instances. . . . I said to them once, that if
those who talked thus to me were to tell me that a person who had
just finished talking to me, and whom I knew well, was not that
person, but that I was indulging in fancies (as they knew), then I
should doubtless believe those people rather than what I had seen.
But if that person had left some jewels with me, and if, when I had
had no jewels before, these remained in my hands as pledges of
great love; if I, who was poor, beheld that I was rich—then I could
not believe those who discredited my experience, even if I wanted
to. I could show these jewels; everyone who knew me would see
clearly that my soul was different. My father-confessor said so.
The difference was very great in all things. It was no dissimulation,
but everyone could see it clearly. . . . I myself saw clearly that I had
suddenly become a different person through these visions.13
The superconscious experiences not only change the intellectual
side of the mind by giving it a new fund of knowledge of the reality
behind the phenomenal world, but they also change the quality of
the emotional life of a person. A mind that has had superconscious
experience needs no inference or logic to understand the existence
of God. It immediately experiences and senses that Reality and has
dynamic conviction of the existence of God and soul. The intellect
is fully illumined, and the emotions are integrated and satisfied. There
is great refinement and exaltation of the contents of the emotional
side of the mind of a man of such realizations. His happiness knows
no bounds, for he has reached the culmination of consciousness—
the mine of bliss. His whole inner life is extremely peaceful, so
much so that everyone can feel the radiance of peace and bliss.14
13 Translated by Professor Edgar S. Brightman from La Vida de La Santa Madre
Terasa de Jesus, Cop. 28, parts of 10 and 11, D. Vecinti de Fuenti, Abras de Santa
Terasa de Jesus (1881), Vol. I. pp. 165-66.
14 The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, trans. Swami Nikhilananda (New York:
Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Center, 1942); and Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna (2nd ed.;
Mylapore, Madras).

159
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
It is often argued that religion only gives us the higher values of
life by teaching us moral principles. However, it stabilizes society
by establishing moral values of equality and brotherhood which
promise harmonious living. Even objective scientific thinkers would
accept this value of religion from the pragmatic and utilitarian point
of view. It is indeed true that religion furnishes higher values of life.
But this is not its primary contribution. Superconscious realizations
reveal new experiences hitherto unknown to people. They give direct
and immediate knowledge of the Reality or God. Truth is attained in
its integral unity. One understands the basic unity of existence. A
survey of the superconscious realizations of Sri Ramakrishna will
prove to us that a flood of knowledge comes to a man of religious
experiences.15 It will also prove that these experiences are verifiable
by following the methods of mental discipline and training. In fact,
these superconscious experiences can be attained by anyone
provided he goes through the required exercises.16
Just as the scientists make no claim that the possibility for
verification of scientific truth is the exclusive property of a particular
race or country, so also there is no exclusive right to the supreme
knowledge of God. Any man belonging to any religion, race, or
country can attain the same types of superconscious experiences.
As we shall see in the next chapter, he may follow different methods
according to the individual characteristics of his mind—whether
they are devotional, meditative, intellectual, or active—and not
because he belongs to a specific place or group.
It is also often said that these experiences may not be actual
pathological conditions; yet they may be projections of one’s
thoughts, products of creative imagination, or instances of self-
hypnosis and autosuggestion. Some say that many children with
15 Life of Sri Ramakrishna (3rd ed.; Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama,
1929).
16 Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna, chap. XIX.

160
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
creative imagination often talk with imaginary persons and have
great fun with them as a result of such states of mind. These critics
seem to think that superconscious experiences are similar to such
childish imagination, and they are more tolerant than others, feeling
pity rather than antagonism toward those who claim to have them.
In their opinion such persons are laboring under delusion and are
living in an imaginative world or in hallucination. Therefore, they try
to remove the so-called “spell” of imagination or hallucination by
giving them right understanding. But critical evaluation of
superconscious experiences convinces us that they can be construed
neither as pathological states nor as products of imagination,
hallucination, or autosuggestion. If such were the case, the effects
would not be elevating, as already described. Autosuggestion can
bring a person to a state of oblivion and stupor where he lives in a
dream world. On the contrary, superconscious experience gives
definite new knowledge and transforms the personality, which could
not be accomplished by self-hypnosis and creative imagination.
However powerful imagination or suggestion may be, it cannot give
more than the mind contains nor can it change the personality by
integrating the emotions. Superconscious realization expands our
consciousness and illumines us, giving real knowledge of the Absolute
or God. As described in Theologia Germanica:
Moreover there are yet other ways to the lovely life of Christ,
besides those we have spoken of: to wit, that God and man should
be wholly united, so that it can be said of a truth, that God and man
are one. This cometh to pass on this wise. Where the Truth always
reigneth, so that true perfect God and true perfect man are at one.
. . .17
17 Theologia Germanica, pp. 75-76.

161
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
We feel that the experiences achieved by Sri Ramakrishna,
Christ, Buddha, Krishna, and lesser personalities are really the basis
of social values. A man ought to be just and loving because of the
experience of unity of life and existence. Equality, brotherhood, and
such other principles are really based on these facts of knowledge.
In fact, religious experiences of this type are the true fundamentals
of social service. The man who has these realizations is really capable
of serving his fellow beings because he experiences the unity of life
and existence. This is the background of “love thy neighbor.” The
lofty ethical ideas, that we appreciate and advocate, are the outcome
of the higher realizations of men and women belonging to different
religions.
So we see that superconscious experiences do not merely give
us higher values of life but they also give us new funds of knowledge
which we previously did not have. This knowledge is not only unique
and new, it is also universal and verifiable by anyone who desires to
go through the required training. Besides, this unique knowledge
really furnishes the background and raison d’être of the higher
values of life in the form of love of neighbors, brotherhood, and
equality. Liberty, equality, and fraternity are taught by men of such
experiences. We make bold to say that they cannot be established
in human society unless they are inspired, strengthened, and guided
by men of such realization. Contemporary history proves to us that
love is not manifest in them, and mere talk of religion and God does
not help us to achieve them. Only those whose character is based
on superconscious experience can inspire a society to establish
universal brotherhood and show what real love is. They do not talk
of love but they manifest it in a dynamic form in and through their
lives and actions, as we have already mentioned. They are the God-
intoxicated lovers of God and man.
Samadhi or superconscious experiences may be classified in

162
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
different groups as described by Patanjali18 and other great
authorities like Sri Ramakrishna.19 The life and experiences of this
great personality reveal many extremely interesting facts of spiritual
realization. There are many experiences which cannot be regarded
as samadhi proper, yet they are “the milestones on the way to
progress,” as Swami Vivekananda calls them. These experiences
are visions of divine forms or personal aspects of God, and they are
of various types according to the mental constitution of the
individual.20 There are innumerable such experiences, and they
convince a seeker of truth that he is on the right path. It should be
noted here that all devotees do not have the same experiences and
visions. In fact, some may not have any of them. Yet they may be
progressing toward superconscious realization as they are becoming
purer, more unselfish, and more loving. They invariably manifest
spiritual qualities whether or not they have these visions.
However, there are persons who conclude that if anyone does
not have these extraordinary experiences he is not evolving spiritually.
This view is often expressed by sincere persons. Many devotees
get discouraged on the path of spiritual life if they have no visions.
We are told that, at times, some of the disciples expressed
discouragement to Sri Ramakrishna. Once one of them noticed that
his brother disciples and other devotees were having different types
of spiritual experiences and even samadhi, but he had none. He
approached Sri Ramakrishna, who encouraged him, saying that such
experiences are not the criteria of spiritual growth. The real test is
in the manifestation of love, devotion, conviction, and mental strength
and purity. Of course, later on this disciple, too, had samadhi.
18 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali, chap. I.
19 Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna (5th ed.; Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math,
1930), I, 87-123.
20 Swami Saradananda, Sri Sri Ramakrishna Lilaprasanga, II, chap. 2.

163
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
We are fully aware that there is considerable criticism of
extraordinary experiences by scientific minds. We cannot blame
them, as there are so many questionable cases and stories which
make one skeptical. However, as we previously stated, one should
not ignore all the experiences just because of the false cases. Our
answer to critics is that the valid experiences change the character
of a person. He gradually manifests higher ethical and spiritual
qualities. The effect is the best test and real proof of their validity.
Moreover, they can be verified by every individual if he trains himself
properly, as we shall understand in the following chapters.
When the devotees reach higher levels of spiritual growth, they
attain the different stages of samadhi or superconscious states.
There are many gradations even in the various types of samadhi.
Savikalpa samadhi gives the experience of the personal aspect of
God. In this a man has the direct and immediate knowledge of the
personal aspect of God while he remains separate from the object
of worship or love. There is duality in the experience. Various
expressions of the body and mind occur at the time of absorption in
the ideal; a man loses all consciousness of the physical world yet he
is fully aware of the enjoyment which he receives from the
realization. Outwardly it may appear that he is in something similar
to a fit, or he is unconscious; yet he is fully conscious of the object
that he is experiencing. His whole mind is completely withdrawn
from the objective world and is focused on the object of realization.
It is true that he is unconscious of the objective world; nevertheless,
he is fully aware of the subtle inner world. In this state a devotee
remains well established in one of the loving relationships with the
personal aspect of God (Ishta). A devotee takes God as mother,
father, child, friend, or beloved and thereby becomes absorbed in
Him. In this form of samadhi, love reaches its culmination; and as
such, it makes the devotee the veritable embodiment of love. It

164
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
often happens that a devotee who attains savikalpa samadhi
through an intense form of love gradually attains other forms of
samadhi.
In the superconscious state of nirvikalpa samadhi the individual
transcends the limitation of personality and immediately and directly
experiences the Absolute in its integral unity. His soul is completely
identified with the Absolute. The knower, known, and knowledge
become one (TriputiVeda). One of the Upanishads says: “As a
result of meditation, the enjoyer, the enjoyed, and the power which
brings about enjoyment—all are declared to be the three aspects of
Brahman.”21 In other words, all differences and their relations merge
into one. As Jesus said: “I and my Father are one.” Hindu teachers
say: “I am Brahman.” These statements are from the depth of the
realization of oneness with the Absolute. In that state a man also
remains fully unconscious of the objective world, even of his own
body, yet inwardly he is one with Consciousness Itself. His whole
inner life is changed, and he has identified himself with the whole of
existence. All limitations of time, space, and causation and the
categories of objective knowledge are completely negated and
annulled. What remains then is pure existence, pure knowledge,
and pure bliss. All the contents of the empirical self are completely
swept away and what remains is the pure Self (Atma). Swami
Brahmananda briefly gives a clear idea:
Samadhi is generally classified as of two kinds. In savikalpa,
the first sort of samadhi, there is the mystic vision of a spiritual
form of God, while the consciousness of individuality still remains.
In nirvikalpa, the other type of samadhi, a man loses his individu-
ality and goes beyond the vision of the form of God. The whole
universe then disappears. There is yet another kind called Ananda
(blissful) samadhi. If an ordinary man reaches this experience, his
21 Svetasvatara Upanishad 1:12.

165
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
body and brain cannot bear the supreme ecstatic joy. He does not
live more than twenty-one days.22
The outer expression of these different types of superconscious
experiences varies in different individuals. There are some physical
changes and expressions which are regarded as manifestations of
higher spiritual emotions in the body.23 These are the physical
indications of higher inner growth. One, however, must not confuse
these with the goal of life. They are only the signs of progress. The
greater the man, the greater his control of outer physical symptoms.
It is interesting to note that the great Christian mystic, St. Teresa of
Avila, expresses a similar idea. She says:
The best sign that anyone has made progress is that she thinks
herself the last of all and proves it by her behavior, and that she
aims at the well being and good of others in all she does. This is the
truest test.24
Bhava and various types of samadhi vary greatly in different
individuals, and these persons are classified accordingly. They are
called Jivan Muktas (liberated souls) of various types according to
the depth of their experiences.25 Their power of love also differs
according to the gradation of their realizations. Again, it is observed
that they vary in their power to change the lives of others. Some
can transform a number of persons while others change a whole
society; and there are some who actually usher in a new civilization
and change the thought current of the world by their own life and
character. Their own transformed personality is so dynamic that
they become the center of a new civilization. Sri Krishna, Buddha,
Christ, Sri Ramakrishna, and others belong to this group. They are
22 The Eternal Companion, p. 107.
23 These are the eightfold physical expressions of inner bhavas (spiritual emotions).
24 Way of Perfection, p. 107.
25 Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, I, 87-123.

166
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
the builders of civilization. The power they exert lies in complete
union with the Absolute. The ordinary devotees cannot remain in
those extraordinary states of superconsciousness for a long time,
as we understand from the Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna and the
teachings of Swami Brahmananda which we have quoted. But the
Incarnations remain absorbed in blissful samadhi from which they
emerge time and again to help humanity. One who has even a glimpse
of bhava or a lower form of spiritual experience is amazed to realize
such a blissful state. A man of experience can alone appreciate this
with joyous wonderment. We again say that modern science is
baffled in the understanding of these experiences. But we request
the scientist to go through the required training and verify them
himself!
Professor Jung in his book, Integration of the Personality, states
that this superconscious experience is a deep unconscious state.
There are dreams and visions of such an informative kind that
the people who have them refuse to believe that they are derived
from an unconscious psyche. They prefer to suppose that they issue
from a sort of superconscious. Such people usually distinguish
between a quasi-physiological or instinctive, unconscious and a
psychic sphere or logos, “above” consciousness which they style
the superconsciousness. As a matter of fact, the psyche called the
superior or the universal in Hindu philosophy, corresponds to what
the West calls the unconscious.26
He further says:
The yogis wind up with Samadhi an ecstatic condition that seems
to be equivalent to an unconscious state. . . . A universal
consciousness is logically identical with the unconscious . . . but the
contents of consciousness become vast but dim with an infinite
26 Integration of the Personality, p. 15. Carl G. Jung, M. D. Translated by Stanley
Dell, copyright, 1939, by Kegan Paul, and reprinted by their permission.

167
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
multitude of objects merging into an indistinct totality— a state in
which the subjective and objective are almost completely identical.
This is all very well, but scarcely to be recommended anywhere
North of the Tropic of Cancer.27
Professor Jung seems to conclude that the superconscious
experiences are “vast but dim” without any understanding of them.
Any man who has had these realizations will laugh at such
conclusions. Patanjali, Swami Vivekananda, and Swami
Brahmananda give just the opposite point of view. They make it
clear that samadhi, or the superconscious state, is vivid and definite.
It is indeed true that in certain superconscious states the subject,
object, and their relation; the perceiver, perceived, and knowledge;
and the enjoyer, enjoyed, and their relation are wholly identified. All
the differences vanish in the integral unity. This happens because
all the manifestations merge at that time in one Absolute Existence
without differentiation of any kind. So the superconscious is not
unconscious; it is full of awareness; nay, it is Consciousness Itself.
It is quite unscientific, to say the least, for a scientific man to
comment on these states as “scarcely to be recommended anywhere
North of the Tropic of Cancer,” without his knowing them at all.
We do not get such impressions in studying the experiences of
Judaeo-Christian types “North of the Tropic of Cancer.” Does
Professor Jung remember the teachings of St. Teresa? And Meister
Eckhart says:
In the soul, there is an agent of the first rank, the intellect, by
means of which the soul detects and knows God. It has five
properties. First, it is detached from the here and now. Second,
it is sui generis, like nothing else. Third, it is pure and uncon-
taminated. . . .28
27 Ibid., p. 26.
28 Meister Eckhart, trans. Raymond Bernard Blakney (New York: Harper &
Brothers, 1941), p. 167.

168
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Anyone who studies the teachings and records of the experiences
of Western and Eastern mystics will never make such unscientific
statements as Professor Jung. The superconscious experiences of
mystics in the West are identical with those of mystics in the East.
Rudolf Otto says “that mysticism is the same in all ages and in all
places, that timeless and independent of history it has always been
identical. East and West and other differences vanish here.”29 As
we have already said, there may be differences in the types of
experiences, not because of the East or West but because of the
temperaments of the individuals. We do not agree with Dr. Jung
that these experiences cannot be recommended to the West. In
fact, everyone, whether Eastern or Western, must have certain
realization if they are to experience the Reality. Otherwise,
knowledge of God and religion, as it is expressed by Professor Jung
and such others, will always remain guesswork! It is interesting to
note what Rudolf Otto has to say in his book, The Idea of the
Holy. “This mental state is perfectly suigeneris and irreducible to
any other; and therefore, like every absolutely primary and
elementary datum, while it admits of being discussed, it cannot be
strictly defined.”30
There are many rationalistic thinkers in the West who express
ideas similar to those of Professor Jung without studying carefully
the mystic practices of both Oriental and Occidental systems, es-
pecially those of the Orient. They are also equally guilty of superfi-
ciality and an unscientific attitude of mind. We deliberately consid-
ered the opinions of Professor Jung knowing that he is interested in
the study of both Eastern and Western schools of thought; yet he
29 Rudolf Otto, Mysticism East and West, trans. Bertha L. Bracey and Richenda C.
Payne (London: Macmillan, 1932), p. xv, and chap. I.
30 Rudolf Otto, The Idea of the Holy, trans. John W. Harvey (London: Humphrey
Milfort, Oxford University Press, 1925), p. 7.

169
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
seems to be considerably confused, to say the least. What he says
is far from the truth. There is some outward similarity between
superconscious and unconscious states yet there is a world of dif-
ference between them. An average man is completely oblivious of
his unconscious state. Often the unconscious contents of the mind
become the causes of abnormalities and functional ailments, al-
though they are unknown to the person concerned. In an ordinary
man the unconscious states create a great many disturbances.
Moreover, as he is not aware of them he cannot recognize them as
such. In the superconscious experience the whole mind is illumined.
A man of superconscious experience knows all the past contents of
his mind. Besides, a man cannot even enter into that state unless
and until the contents of the unconscious are at first controlled and
integrated and then wholly emptied. It is impossible for a man to
aspire for superconscious experience until and unless both con-
scious and unconscious states of mind are wholly purified through
intense spiritual practices. So the unconscious contents and
superconscious experiences are as far apart as the two poles. One
is below the development of consciousness; the other is above ordi-
nary consciousness. One becomes an obstacle of normal life; the
other is the supernormal life, far above even the so-called normal
states. To identify the superconscious state with the unconscious
state is to mix darkness and light. In one case man is completely
oblivious of the existence of God; in the other case man is fully
aware of the existence of God, nay, identified with Him.31 Swami
Vivekananda describes these states of consciousness:
First is the conscious plane, in which all work is always accom-
panied with the feeling of egoism. Next comes the unconscious
plane, where all work is unaccompanied by the feeling of egoism.
That part of mind-work which is unaccompanied with the feeling of
egoism is unconscious work, and that part which is accompanied
31 Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, I, 87-123.

170
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
with the feeling of egoism is conscious work. In the lower animals
this unconscious work is called instinct. In higher animals, and in
the highest of all animals, man, what is called conscious work, pre-
vails.
But it does not end here. There is a still higher plane upon which
the mind can work. It can go beyond consciousness. Just as uncon-
scious work is beneath consciousness, so there is another work
which is above consciousness, and which also is not accompanied
with the feeling of egoism. The feeling of egoism is only on the
middle plane. When the mind is above or below that line there is no
feeling of “I,” and yet the mind works. When the mind goes beyond
this line of self-consciousness it is called Samadhi or super-con-
sciousness.32
When we study the writings of great Christian mystics, we realize
that Professor Jung’s conclusions are extremely superficial and
erroneous. Meister Eckhart, who is one of the greatest men of
realization, says: “When one takes God as he is divine, having the
reality of God within him, God sheds light on everything. Everything
will taste like God and reflect him. God will shine in him all the
time.”33 There are states of superconscious experience which
cannot be described or related through human language as they are
beyond the gross state of mind.34 Language is limited to the realm
of the empirical self which dissolves at that time. Consequently, the
human mind, which is the basis of the empirical self, cannot describe
them. As Swami Brahmananda says:
This Samadhi cannot be described. It is beyond the reach of the
gross mind, beyond language. It is beyond Asti and Nasti (human
calculation), beyond pleasure and pain, beyond joy and sorrow, be-
yond light, beyond darkness, beyond all duality. Human language is
too feeble to say what that blessed state is.35
32 Works, I, 180.
33 Meister Eckhart, p. 9.
34 Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, I, 88.
35 Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 126.

171
C H A P T E R X I
Methods of Superconscious Experience
T
HE question arises from a scientific point of view as to whether
or not the superconscious experience of an individual can be
verified by other people. When we study the religious history of the
world, we find that there have been a few cases in which men and
women have stumbled into mystic realizations without going through
discipline or training. Saul, on the way to Damascus, had the
wonderful experience of Jesus, the Christ, which transformed him
into St. Paul and made him a great pillar of the Church of Christ.
Such cases are known in India and other parts of Asia and Europe.
They are generally regarded as special manifestations and
expressions of the grace of God.
The scientific person likes to know if this knowledge can be gained
as we learn scientific facts. In other words, is there any method by
which one can know these experiences? Our answer is that certain
methods lead one to these experiences, provided one follows them
strictly. It is true, however, that these methods are not like scientific
laboratory experiments. In the laboratory we objectively study
external phenomena which are separate from us. But in studying
the facts of superconscious realization we take up an altogether
different method. The systems of study and investigation are
subjective. We train the mind itself. Nevertheless, these methods
are scientific so far as universality and possibility of verification are

172
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
concerned. Just as any scientist belonging to any country, race, or
religion can make required experiments, verify the scientific facts,
and arrive at the same conclusions and experiences provided he is
thorough and exact; so any man belonging to any country, race, or
religion can have the same type of superconscious realizations
provided he is thorough and exact in the methods required; and he
can verify them himself. In fact, according to some great Hindu
leaders, religion really begins with samadhi. Swami Brahmananda
was emphatic on this point and he would urge his disciples to attain
to spiritual realization.1
It may seem that this is a rigid conception of religion. The standard
will appear to be very high, almost beyond the realm of ordinary
men. It may be argued that under these conditions there will not be
many adherents of religion. After a little consideration we cannot
help but be convinced that such a statement is true. God and
experiences of God are practically unknown to an average man. To
him religion means following certain doctrines and rituals or believing
in God and certain great spiritual personalities. God is still an
intellectual conception or belief based on books and the words of
others. He is not a fact of experience. Conceptual knowledge of
God and actual experience of Him are quite different; in fact, there
is a world of difference between them. The effect of such
experience of God, as we discussed in the previous chapter, shows
that one must have superconscious realization for immediate and
direct knowledge of God. Therefore, verification is the best
confirmation or proof of religious experiences, and as such it is
scientific. The methods are also scientific, as they lead to the
realization of religious truth.
It is often argued that these experiences come to a man through
divine grace and divine intervention, and we cannot do anything
about them. Sometimes devout persons seem to think that it is
sacrilegious even to consider adopting spiritual practices to attain
1 Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda.

173
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
the experience of God. They feel that spiritual experiences come
only through divine grace, that our duty is to remain passive so that
the divine will and power may function through us.
We agree that there are some such cases in the religious history
of the world, when men and women have had superconscious
experience of God without any effort on their part. But such cases
are few and far between in both the East and the West. On the
other hand, most of the great religious personalities followed
systematic practices which enabled them to reach the goal of life,
God-consciousness, after gradually going through the different
mystical experiences. There are also other persons who disciplined
themselves enough to have these high spiritual experiences and
superconscious states. The Christian mystic orders of St. Bernard,
St. Francis, St. Teresa, St. John of the Cross, Meister Eckhart,
Thomas à Kempis, and others had definite systematic spiritual
discipline and training for the realization of ordinary religious
experiences. We can especially mention the mystical exercises of
St. Ignatius and St. Teresa. Thomas à Kempis gives helpful
suggestions for spiritual exercises.2 The Christian mystics who really
had the different types of superconscious experiences gave
tremendous emphasis to spiritual practices. Also, in some of the
Jewish mystic organizations certain disciplinary processes or
devotional practices are advocated for superconscious realization.
Some branches of Mohammedanism prescribe methods for the
realization of God. Hinduism and Buddhism made scientific
investigation of these experiences as well as of the methods for
attaining them; and, as a result, we find well-developed scientific
details in the methods for superconscious realization in the Hindu
system.
2 Thomas à Kempis, Following of Christ (New York: Catholic Publishing Co.), p.
549.

174
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
The teachings of Sri Krishna in the Gita, the teachings of Patanjali,
and those of other great Hindu spiritual teachers give us various
methods after studying the different temperaments of individuals.
These methods are called yogas. This word is often grossly
misunderstood in the West, especially in America. Most people seem
to think that yoga is thought reading, fortune telling, “rope tricks,”
or expressions of mysterious powers. We need not say who is
responsible for this erroneous interpretation of the word. However,
we realize that yoga is a foreign word, and Americans are not
likely to know its proper meaning. It really signifies “union,” being
derived from the root yuj—to yoke. Through yoga we are joined
to God. There is no mystery mongering connected with it. Patanjali
defines yoga as the complete control of the mind-stuff (chitta
vrittis).3 When the mind is fully controlled, the Truth reveals Itself.
Mental calmness and tranquillity can be attained in various ways
through the different yogas. Swami Vivekananda, the great authority
on yoga in theory and practice, tells us:
There are various such Yogas or methods of union—but the chief
ones are—Karma-Yoga, Bhakti-Yoga, Raja-Yoga, and Jnana-
Yoga.
    Every man must develop according to his own nature. As every
science has its methods, so has every religion. The methods of
attaining the end of religion are called Yoga by us, and the different
forms of Yoga that we teach, are adapted to the different natures
and temperaments of men. We classify them in the following way,
under four heads:—
    (1) Karma-Yoga—The manner in which a man realises his
own divinity through works and duty.
    (2) Bhakti-Yoga—The realisation of the divinity through
devotion to, and love of, a personal God.
    (3) Raja-Yoga—The realisation of a man’s own divinity
through the control of mind.
3 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali I:2.

175
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
    (4) Jnana-Yoga—The realisation of a man’s own divinity
through knowledge.
    These are all different roads leading to the same centre—
God.4
According to Hindu teachers, human minds are grouped into four
distinct types: intellectual, emotional, active, and meditative. Apart
from that, these different types are subdivided according to the
mental structure of innumerable individuals, and every one of these
types and individuals has distinct methods for spiritual development.
Superconscious realizations are processes of spiritual evolution and
not of superimposition, so the teachers try to find out the individual
characteristics of the different aspirants and accordingly prescribe
individual methods to suit their temperaments and mental capacities.
However, there are common requisites for all types of minds. For
instance, the science of ethics is the foundation of spiritual practices
for all temperaments. Without thorough ethical training one cannot
expect to have a controlled mind. The practice of ethical principles
and psychology go together. According to Indian spiritual teachers,
superconscious experiences are based on the science of ethics and
higher psychology. As we related previously, one cannot have the
power of concentration unless one tries to control and purify the
mind and develop basic ethical qualities. This is what the Christian
mystics call the “purgative state” and what the Hindus call yama
and niyama or shama and dama. When the mind is purified it can
then be focused on God. The great spiritual personalities of the
world stressed this in their teachings. Jesus said: “Blessed are the
pure in heart: for they shall see God.”5 Sri Krishna declares:
But the self-controlled man, moving among objects with senses
under restraint, and free from attraction and aversion, attains to
tranquillity.
4 Works, V, 219-20.
5 Matt. 5:8.

176
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
    In tranquillity, all sorrow is destroyed. For the intellect of him
who is tranquil-minded, is soon established in firmness.
No knowledge (of the Self) has the unsteady. Nor has he
meditation. To the unmeditative there is no peace. And how can
one without peace have happiness?6
Patanjali emphasized that inner and outer purification is absolutely
necessary for spiritual growth; yama and niyama are the first steps
toward higher realization.7 Sri Ramakrishna said: “God is seen when
the mind is perfectly tranquil.”8 Therefore, ethical practices are a
prerequisite for any method of superconscious realization. The
practice of concentration can be fruitful only when the mind is made
quiet through higher ethical purification and the whole nervous system
is purified and strengthened through the practice of yama and
niyama.
The intellectual type of seeker follows the rationalistic method of
distinguishing the truth from the untruth, the real from the unreal, by
using the power of discrimination and analysis. This is Jnana Yoga.
An adamantine will power is required for this method as transitory
phenomena and non-essentials have to be negated and rejected in
order to know the permanent, the Absolute. The emotions must be
controlled and regulated; in fact, no emotional expression should be
permitted because any kind of emotional expression presupposes
plurality and duality. A follower of Jnana Yoga must constantly
remind himself of unity. Anything that arouses the consciousness of
multiplicity must be completely rejected. In order to achieve this,
one must develop the power of concentration and will. This method
seems to be quite contrary to the ordinary functionings of human
6 Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita II:64-66.
7 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali II:29-33, and Vivekachudamani.
8 Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna XX:392.

177
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
beings, as we are always giving vent to our emotions; moreover,
our activities presuppose a certain kind of emotional background.
The practice of concentration and meditation in Jnana Yoga is
very difficult for an average man or woman as one has to focus the
mind on the “impersonal,” non-bodily, Self-conscious Absolute (Sat-
chid-ananda, Nirguna Brahman). It is very difficult for an ordinary
person who is living on the plane of time-space-causal relationship
and name, form, and attributes to conceive anything that is beyond
these categories. It is true that certain symbols like sound and light
are often given as the objects of concentration; but even such a
symbol or substitute of the unconditioned Absolute (Nirguna
Brahman) is difficult for the beginners of this path to use as an
ideal. So this intellectual method is not appropriate for the average
man and woman, as life on an ordinary level would become
confusing. There are few persons in the world who can start their
spiritual practices entirely from the intellectual point of view. They
require tremendous discipline and ethical training to begin with this
method. It is nice to talk of principles and philosophy; but it is
altogether a different matter to practice the life of intellect; and it is
still harder to see the oneness of life and existence in ordinary human
behavior. In fact, a follower of Jnana Yoga, or the intellectual path,
must try to find unity and divinity in every thought and action. He
must try to find the Absolute beyond the relative. This must be the
constant practice, and all activities must be regulated to it. Gradually
plurality, and even duality of every type, vanishes. One has to
eliminate all consciousness of difference in everyday life. So it is
difficult for an ordinary person to follow this path even though he
may be a philosopher. Many persons seem to think that they are
Absolutists in their philosophy but their actions reveal that they are

178
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
still functioning on the lower plane of relative existence, or Maya.
According to Hindu thinkers, they are still living in ignorance.
A great American philosopher told us about a professed Absolutist
in this country. We shall cite the case with due respect for the
intellect of this Absolutist. It was reported that after World War I
the question was raised whether or not the American Philosophical
Association should resume intellectual relations with German
philosophers. The Absolutist opposed the suggestion on the ground
that he desired no relations with Germans. This is not a singular
instance; we have seen such cases all over the world. A person
may have intellectual flights of Absolutism yet, emotionally, he
remains on the very common plane where hatred and other such
tendencies of differentiation still function. When a man is aware of
diversity and does not use his discrimination, he cannot attain
knowledge of the Absolute. That is the very reason that Vedanta
Aphorisms9 teach that one must have an intense desire for higher
knowledge and be ready to sacrifice everything for its attainment;
that is to say, one must give up longing for anything that arouses
consciousness of duality or plurality or that is a reminder of physical
existence and separate consciousness. He must possess keen power
of discrimination and, above all, higher ethical qualities. Then alone
can one follow the path of analysis. Ethical qualities are the
prerequisites of this path. It is, however, possible to take it up after
a considerable amount of progress has been made through other
practices.
Emotional persons have to begin with their emotions in attaining
spiritual realization. They follow Bhakti Yoga or the path of love
and devotion. The vast majority of the people in the world are
predominantly emotional, so it is both convenient and necessary for
them to use their emotions for higher spiritual development. We
9 Brahma Sutra with Sri Sankaracharya’s Commentary (Introduction) and
Vivekachudamani by Sri Sankaracharya.

179
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
can hardly find a man or woman who has not strong emotional
urges, and it is considered wise to express them instead of starving
or discarding them. Emotions are great powers; a seeker after truth
is, therefore, asked to direct them to an aspect of God which is
suitable to his own temperament. It is not correct to assume that
they can be directed to only one particular aspect of God and not to
any other. Some people become narrow and bigoted in their spiritual
life and insist on one aspect as the only object of love and devotion
for everyone. As the All Loving Being is infinite He has infinite
aspects. Psychologically speaking, human beings have different
mental attitudes and degrees of power. When they try to conceive
of God with the mind limited by the conditions of time-space
relationship, their minds are generally limited by the reactions to the
objective world of name and form. They also have certain
predispositions and preconceived notions of the objects that they
experience. Consequently, they have different types of emotions
according to prepossessed inclinations. In fact, the mind is extremely
limited to the finite conditions of life. As such, they necessarily see
God with their limited mental possibilities for the time being.
Therefore, there will always remain differences in the understanding
of God. Hindu spiritual leaders maintain that these differences and
variations do not affect the spiritual growth of an individual. On the
contrary, their opinion is that in the beginning of spiritual life everyone
must take a particular aspect of God suitable to his own individual
inclinations and possibilities. In fact, according to them, spiritual
growth is accelerated if one can take an aspect of God for meditation
according to his inner nature, as we explained in the chapter on
“Meditation.”
It is also fallacious to think that God can be conceived only as
father and not as mother, friend, beloved, or child. All the emotions

180
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
characteristic in such human relationships can be applied to God
according to individual temperaments and requirements. That is the
very reason the devotional mystics vary in their methods of approach
to God. Some few may like to think of Him as their child, while
more prefer to look on Him as father or mother, and again others
will love God as their friend or beloved because this attitude is best
suited to their individual temperaments and this relationship is natural
and spontaneous to them. These relationships are called bhavas by
Hindu religious leaders.10 They are: shanta (placid love for the
Creator, Lord, and Ruler); dasya (relationship between master and
servant); sakhya (friendship between two friends); vatsalya (love
between child and parent); and madhura (sweet relationship
between lovers). Some devotees also establish a relationship in which
God is the mother and the devotee is the child.11 These bhavas
should be cultivated and established almost according to the same
patterns of our human behavior to our beloved ones. Many Christian
mystics and others also followed this process of establishing loving
relationships with God according to the predominant tendencies of
their own minds. With this method, relationship with God becomes
easy and effective, and at the same time the natural innate tendencies
are not wasted.12 Every person has certain spontaneous urges.
Hindu teachers want their followers to use and direct their natural
inclinations, for experience proves that people grow immensely in
this way as they have the satisfaction of expressing their innate
emotional powers. It has been found by Hindu teachers that when
one cultivates such a loving relationship with God spiritual growth is
accelerated. One reaches the supreme goal of life by following any
of these bhavas. However, no bhava should be changed for another
10 See Bhagavatam; Vaishnava literature of India; Narada, Bhakti Sutra; and Swami
Saradananda, Sri Sri Ramakrishna Lilaprasanga, II.
11 Works, III, 92-98.
12 Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna, chap. XXV.

181
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
until the spiritual aspirant reaches the culmination of a relationship.
A person can, however, change one relationship for another after
becoming thoroughly established in the bhava and after experiencing
the All Loving Being through it. This was done by Sri Ramakrishna.13
In order to cultivate emotional relationships with God, one is
advised to take up various auxiliary methods, such as external and
internal worship and other such practices. In external worship a
devotee tries to think of God through worship with material
ingredients such as flowers, light, incense, perfume, and food. With
internal worship, a devotee is required to direct his emotions along
with the offerings of inner qualities and attributes and elements of
his body and mind. Some of the devotees also try to remember and
recapitulate the incidents in the lives of Incarnations like Krishna,
Buddha, and Christ. Remembrance of the Passion and other
incidents in the lives of these great personalities are helpful for
integrating and unifying the whole mind. Some of these aspirants
often adopt the repetition of the name of God as a practice. Hindu
mystics have developed a science of the repetition of the name of
God (mantra shatra), and according to them, a seeker after truth
can have the highest states of superconscious realization by repeating
some of the symbolic names of God while meditating on Him at the
same time. There are different short names for the various aspects
of God; and, as we recorded in the chapter on “Meditation,” these
names vary according to the temperament of the individuals. The
progress of the devotees greatly depends on the choice of these
names. Repetition helps the devotees in attaining that concentration
which leads their minds to the deepest state of meditation. Swami
13 Swami Saradananda, Sri Sri Ramakrishna Lilaprasanga, II.

182
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Brahmananda emphasizes the importance of japam (repetition of
the name of God):
Japam. Japam. Japam. While you work, practice japam. Let
the wheel of the name of God go round and round in the midst of all
activities. Do this! All the burning of the heart will be soothed. Don’t
you know how many sinners have become pure and free and divine
by taking refuge in the name of God? Have intense faith in God and
in His name. Know that God and His name are one. He dwells in
the hearts of His devotees. Call on Him earnestly. Pray to Him:
“Reveal Your grace to me. Give me faith and devotion.” Pray
earnestly. 
Make 
your 
mind 
and 
your 
lips 
one.
    Cover everything with God. See Him in all creatures. As you
learn to see God everywhere, you will become “humbler than a
blade of grass.” Hear only of God and talk only of Him. Shun that
place where His name is not uttered as you would a cremation-
ground.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  
Repeat His name and call on Him. He is very near and dear to
all. Why should He not reveal Himself? Open your heart to Him.
He will guide you along the right path. There is nothing more purifying
than His name and meditation upon Him. He is our very own. He
easily becomes revealed to us.14
Historically we find there have been many great personalities
who reached the higher mystical experiences through this practice.
It has been recorded that it is the easiest and the most suitable
process of realizing the truth in this age. Sri Ramakrishna, the great
modern Hindu leader, emphasized its value. Sir John Woodruff has
translated some of the Hindu scriptures dealing with this subject.
The active types of persons can reach superconscious realization
by performance of unselfish work without attachment. This is called
Karma Yoga. Sri Krishna says:
14 The Eternal Companion, p. 145.

183
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
The truly admirable man controls his senses by the power of his
will. All his actions are disinterested. All are directed along the path
to union with Brahman.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  
Do your duty always; but without attachment. That is how a
man reaches the ultimate truth; by working without anxiety about
results.15
There is a technique of doing work.16 One must forget one’s self
in the action and also completely forget the result that is achieved
thereby. Sri Krishna tells us: “Thy right is to work only; but never to
the fruits thereof.”17 In this method a devotional person constantly
remembers God in and through action and an intellectual person
remembers the Absolute and feels oneness in the universe. The
followers of Karma Yoga try to see the manifestation of God in all
and serve them accordingly. To them a sick man, an illiterate person,
a weak individual steeped in ignorance and expressing lower
tendencies is a veritable manifestation of God; and so they serve
suffering humanity. They do not go out to do “charity,” nor do they
have the idea that they are helping these people. On the contrary,
they serve them with love and devotion. Swami Vivekananda, the
great champion of Karma Yoga in this age, says:
Look upon every man, woman and every one as God. You cannot
help anyone; you can only serve: serve the children of the Lord,
serve the Lord Himself, if you have the privilege. If the Lord grants
that you can help any one of His children, blessed you are; do not
think too much of yourselves. Blessed you are that that privilege
was given to you, when others had it not. Do it only as a worship. I
should see God in the poor, and it is for my salvation that I go and
worship them. . . . Bold are my words, and let me repeat that it is
15 Bhagavad-Gita, trans. Swami Prabhavananda (1944), pp. 53-55.
16 Works, I, 23-116.
17 Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita, trans. Swami Swarupananda (1933), II:47.

184
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
the greatest privilege in our life that we are allowed to serve the
Lord in all these shapes.18
There are, however, persons (some of the Buddhists), who
attained illumination without any thought of a personal or impersonal
God by performing action for its own sake, forgetting themselves
completely and remaining indifferent to the result of action.
There is a dispute as to the efficacy of this path and whether
Karma Yoga alone can lead one to the knowledge of Reality or
whether it is merely a stepping stone to higher spiritual practices.
Some thinkers, even those in Hindu groups, seem to be of the opinion
that the path of action should be followed for the purpose of purifying
the individual; then when the person becomes fit for higher meditation
and other devotional exercises, he should intensify these practices
and give up action. According to these thinkers, action of any type
cannot lead one directly to the Absolute. Others, again, are of the
opinion that one should combine work with worship or with
devotional practices and meditation. Their view is that the
combination of these two methods, work and devotion (Karma Yoga
and Bhakti Yoga), will lead one to the highest realization; and until
this goal is reached, one must continue with the combined method.
But Sri Krishna and Swami Vivekananda are clear that one can
attain the goal of religion by following any one of these methods.
Sri Krishna says that “only children make the distinction.” That is
to say no one path is superior to another. Then again he declares: “.
. . the path of knowledge for the meditative, the path of work for
the active.”19 He also tells us that many persons have attained
perfection by following Karma Yoga.
We should note in connection with Karma Yoga that it has no
place for restless activity. A Karma Yogi must always be alert that
18 Works, III, 246-47.
19 Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita III:3.

185
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
the mind does not get mixed up with ambition and so-called “self-
expression.” Like the Jnana Yogi he should always try to eliminate
self-consciousness or the ego. It is quite conceivable that in the
midst of activities, however well meaning he may be in the beginning,
the ego of a person is stimulated by the objective success of the
work. However, success in Karma Yoga does not mean external
achievement but rather inner purification and conquest of the lower
self. Let there be no confusion about the process of Karma Yoga
and achievements by that method; otherwise, it will defeat itself by
merely producing external and objective results in the form of
success in creating bigger and better institutions, cities, etc. If Karma
Yogis are not careful of the inner workings of the mind in the form
of ambition for external achievement, their activities will no longer
remain as true Karma Yoga. So the path of action may not
necessarily lead to success in the objective sense but rather in the
subjective sense; that is to say, it should lead a person to a peaceful
state of mind, as it emphasizes conquest of desire for the fruit of
action. Therefore, the great spiritual leaders often advise beginners
on this path to practice meditation, worship, or any other auxiliary
method to keep the ideal bright and the mind free from desire for
ambition and “self-expression.” It is, however, possible for a few
persons to follow Karma Yoga strictly without any auxiliary method.
We should also note that this is predominantly an age of action;
and Swami Vivekananda, great teacher of all the systems of yoga,
convincingly tells us that most of the people will have to follow the
path of action more or less. In fact, the right form of action, or
Karma Yoga, is applicable to all spiritual aspirants, and they do
follow certain phases of Karma Yoga in the course of their spiritual
evolution. Sri Krishna says in the Gita that man works being impelled

186
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
by his very nature.20 So it is a mistake to think that spiritual persons
become other-worldly and neglect their duties in life. On the contrary,
the real teachers of the systems of yoga, like Sri Krishna and Swami
Vivekananda, glorify the active elements in man by giving them
proper direction so that his activities can lead him to the direct and
immediate realization of God. It goes without saying that the path
of action is not just a mere step to higher practices whereby one is
purified, made unselfish and otherwise fit for them; but it is a definite
path in itself, leading one to the same goal that is reached by any of
the other yogas—Jnana, Bhakti, or Raja.
The meditative people have to take up certain forms of
concentration and meditation, as they are described in the chapter
on “Meditation,” to reach superconscious experience. This is Raja
Yoga or the psychological method. The word Raja means “royal.”
The practice of concentration and meditation is needed more or
less in every path in different ways, so it is regarded as a “royal”
path. This psychological method helps one to integrate the mind; all
mental states are unified. Moreover, a scientific man can follow it
step by step and train his mind even if he cannot, for the time being,
accept the idea of God. Many Buddhists and Hindus have started
with this psychological yoga and have reached the goal. In fact,
when the mind is well regulated, controlled, and unified, the truth
reveals itself. The eightfold steps of Raja Yoga have been
elaborately explained in Chapter VI. Therefore, to avoid repetition
only a brief statement is made here.
Many Western and Eastern readers are often interested in Hatha
Yoga. People frequently confuse it with Raja Yoga as there are
some common physical steps in both. It will be interesting to note
here that Hindu psychologists of the Raja Yoga type have found in
the course of is important for mental development, as the mind of
20 Ibid., III:5.

187
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
the average person functions through the nervous system. When
the body is sick or weak, the nervous system is consequently
affected. The mind becomes restless or uncontrollable, and it also
often becomes dull, inert, and sleepy. These states are obstacles to
higher mental development. In order to practice the last four steps—
pratyahara (withdrawal of the mind), dharana (concentration),
dhyana (meditation), and samadhi (superconscious)—a person
must have control over the physical functions of the body. He must
also have strong nerves; otherwise he cannot have effective
concentration or meditation, and it becomes impossible for him to
attain the last step of Raja Yoga. Many of the yogis in the earlier
days of their practice of Raja Yoga observe certain Hatha Yoga
practices, which are mostly physical, in order to strengthen the
physical constitution. That is one of the reasons Raja Yoga is
sometimes regarded as a psychophysical process of the attainment
of truth.
Unfortunately, it was found that many persons who practiced
Hatha Yoga developed some of the extrasensory perceptions and
occult or psychic powers, and they forgot the primary objective of
yoga practices. These powers are regarded as obstacles (which
were discussed in the chapter on “Extrasensory Experiences”), so
we deliberately do not propose to give an elaborate treatment of
Hatha Yoga, though many Western readers will be deeply interested
in some of these practices for the purpose of using mental power
for control of these physical laws.
Some thinkers subdivide the four main divisions of yoga— Jnana,
Bhakti, Karma, and Raja. For instance, Mantra Yoga and such
other subdivisions actually form parts of one of the main divisions.
Outstanding leaders like Swami Vivekananda did not feel the
necessity of separate treatment; they are not being mentioned
separately here, as it would only create confusion.

188
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
It is difficult for beginners to get settled in higher spiritual
practices. The mind remains restless; and if a person continues one
form of practice, it becomes monotonous. So it is most advisable
that the different methods—study, devotion, work, and meditation—
be combined until a genuine interest in and love for God are created.
Otherwise, there is great danger of reaction and dryness in the
spiritual practices. Many persons have given up the exercises and
ruined their progress because they were not wisely directed. Again,
many devotees, in their early enthusiasm, try to imitate great saints
and spiritually well-established persons. They try to intensify
meditation or worship and ignore other aspects of life and activity,
even in the beginning of religious life. They need guidance so that
they will not have bad reactions, dryness, and lack of interest. So it
is always desirable to have a little variation in the early stages of
spiritual practices. A good thought has been expressed by a devotee:
“We all have our Destination, although different paths we choose
to the storehouse of Infinite Knowledge for the Self to explore.”
Swami Vivekananda was the advocate of developing and
harmonizing these four methods or yogas in the individual. He felt
that, if anyone would combine two or three methods, he would have
more harmonious development than otherwise. There would not be
any possibility of narrowness or one-sidedness, and the character
would be well rounded and fully developed. It is, however, difficult
for one to perfect one’s self in all of them simultaneously. There
are, of course, persons who can do it, but usually one feels quite
successful if he can reach the goal by following one system
thoroughly. It goes without saying that one must perfect one’s self
in whatever method is adopted in order to attain the desired
realization. However, partial practice or combination of some of
the methods is extremely elevating and desirable, especially for
beginners. One should be careful not to lose interest in God by

189
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
being injudicious in practices. One should also be careful in making
the right choice of the methods according to one’s own temperament.
According to Swami Brahmananda:
All these have one and the same purpose—God realization. There
is so much difference between one man and another in their
inclinations and their temperaments that no one method can be
assigned to all for their Sadhana or spiritual advancement. Different
temperaments require different Sadhana and different ways of
worship. To meet these varying demands the Scriptures have
prescribed four principal means,—Samadhi [direct worship of the
Absolute], Dhyana [meditation, where the worshiper remains
separate], actual Japam [repetition of the name of God], prayer
and external worship.21
As the different yogas or methods all lead one ultimately to God,
so do the various creeds and religions of the world.
21 Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 130.

190
C H A P T E R X I I
Can Superconscious Knowledge Be Imparted?
T
HERE is a legitimate question in the minds of the vast majority
of scientific thinkers as to whether or not superconscious
knowledge can be imparted to others. If it is to be scientifically
investigated it must be communicable. Many devout religious
persons are of the opinion that this knowledge comes through the
grace of God, as we mentioned in the previous chapter; consequently,
it cannot be the object of scientific investigation, nor can it be
communicated as one person gives an object to another. The history
of religion proves to us that superconscious knowledge as well as
the lower extrasensory perceptions, psychic and occult powers can
be transmitted and received. Of course, there are certain necessary
conditions to be fulfilled by the person who communicates them
and the person who receives them. In the first place, every person
who stumbles into certain extraordinary experiences, whether they
are occult powers or higher superconscious realizations, cannot
transmit these powers to others as effectively as it is desirable.
When a person stumbles into spiritual experiences, he can have
certain definite realization of the Ultimate Reality. Yet because he
has not developed the technique and is not well established in it he
cannot transmit that knowledge directly and immediately to others.
He can, perhaps, describe some of his experiences and give some
idea of his personal realizations. On the other hand, when a man is
thoroughly established in the superconscious, whether through certain

191
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
practices or through divine grace, he can transmit this power and
this knowledge to others— not as mediate knowledge but as direct
perception.
It is true, however, that the exact nature of emotional reaction in
certain spiritual realizations cannot be communicated and cannot
be made enjoyable through oral expressions, just as the emotion of
love cannot be qualitatively given to anyone. In order to understand
the real effect of love, one must fall in love. A mother cannot
communicate her inner emotion to anyone else. In order to
understand a mother’s love one has to be a mother. Similarly, spiritual
realizations, whether they come almost instantly through divine
intervention alone or through spiritual practice and divine intervention
combined, cannot be communicated in their qualitative value, nor
can they be fully described by human language as to their quantitative
value, since they are unique experiences so far as the persons are
concerned—just as the experience of love is unique.
It is also true that there are some systematic methods by following
which one can reach these experiences. The so-called extrasensory
perceptions, occult powers, and such other extraordinary display of
mental or psychic powers can, of course, be expressed as prescribed
by Patanjali in Raja Yoga. The higher superconscious realizations
can also be reached by systematic methods, as Patanjali and other
great religious leaders of other countries and religions prescribed,
and which we studied in the last chapter.
The person who transmits or gives this knowledge is the Guru
(teacher), and the person who receives it is the shisya (disciple).
The Guru is not an ordinary teacher of the type we hear about in
the church schools and other schools of the West. The conception
of Guru is deep and significant in spiritual life. According to most
of the Hindu authorities, one can hardly expect to reach the higher

192
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
state of divine realization without the help of his Guru. Swami
Brahmananda says:
It is not so easy without a Guru. The Guru is one who shows
the path of God through a mantram (holy name). He gives the
secret of spiritual practices. He watches over his disciple and pro-
tects him from going astray. A Guru must be a knower of Brah-
man.1
As a Guru is so essential to the spiritual development of his disciples,
the required qualifications of the religious teacher should be
understood.
As mentioned previously, a teacher of higher psychology or
spiritual realization must be thoroughly established in those
experiences to teach others. His mind must be fully illumined—
first, through ethical practices and next, through practices of
concentration, meditation, and such other disciplinary processes.
When a man is established in higher realizations, his mind becomes
completely colorless or free from all preconceived notions and
impressions, and he can empty the contents of his mind at will.
When he tries to impart suitable methods for spiritual practices and
training to his disciple, he makes his mind completely free from all
preconceived thoughts and ideas; and, consequently, he can
immediately understand the very nature of his disciple. He can also
understand the distinct qualities of that particular mind. A Guru
must also inspire confidence and devotion within the student; the
relation between these two persons must be extremely harmonious
and loving. A teacher goes through the difficulties of imparting
knowledge to the disciple only because of his intense love for him.
To use the modern psychological term, there must be a
“transference” of the highest type between the teacher and the
1 The Eternal Companion; p. 184.

193
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
disciple. This relationship is created not only because of the love
between them but also because of the convictions of both. The
teacher must have faith in his student, believing that the student is
capable of learning what he is to teach. The teacher, through his
deep understanding, also knows the future possibilities of the student,
and his conviction and faith brings out the student’s latent possibilities.2
The shisya (disciple), too, must have the necessary qualities for
higher realization and development. In the first place, he must have
confidence in the teacher and devotion and love for him. Then he
must have the spirit of obedience and be ready to follow implicitly
the advice and instructions of the teacher. This does not, however,
preclude the questioning spirit. A student is always encouraged to
ask questions. “Know That (Truth) by questioning” the Hindu
scriptures tell us. The spirit of humility is the most important condition
for spiritual development, however, although questions and inquiries
are much encouraged in a real spiritual relationship between teacher
and student. The student must also have perseverance and tenacity
in order to continue the practices and discipline according to
instructions. There are some persons who, out of curiosity, like to
make a little experiment for a few days, and then they give up the
practices. This fickleness of attitude has been extremely discouraged
by all religious psychologists. Patanjali regards this as one of the
greatest obstacles to spiritual unfoldment. Swami Vivekananda
strongly emphasized shraddha (dynamic faith and consequent
action). Without this tenacious faith and consequent perseverance
in practices, a student can hardly expect to have any of the higher
realizations.
It is true that often students get discouraged because they cannot
reach the goal as soon as they had expected. One can easily
understand that the practice for higher realizations requires
tremendous patience, as we have to struggle with the illusive and
restless mind. Unfortunately, our minds are much agitated and colored
2 Works, IV, 19-27.

194
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
by innumerable past experiences. Apart from that, the subconscious
impressions (samskaras), the accumulated residuals of past thoughts
and actions, are so strong that they agitate the mind all the time.
Modern psychoanalysts and others find it amazing to what extent
the subconscious states disturb the conscious mind. Indian
psychologists thoroughly understand this factor. Consequently, they
warn the students not to be disturbed or discouraged when they
find that it is difficult to hold the mind on the object of concentration.
Swami Brahmananda gives methods by which a disciple can be
helped through such difficult periods:
These are the different stages through which the aspirant
progresses. A man should begin from where he stands. If, for in-
stance, an ordinary man is told to meditate on union with the Abso-
lute Brahman, he cannot grasp the truth of it; nor can he follow the
instructions. He may make the attempt, but soon he will tire and
give it up. However, if the same man is asked to worship God with
flowers, perfume, and other accessories he will find that his mind
gradually becomes concentrated on God and he will soon experi-
ence a joy in his worship. Through ritualistic worship, devotion to
the performance of japam grows. The finer the mind becomes, the
greater is its capacity for higher forms of worship. Japam inclines
the mind toward meditation. Thus the aspirant moves toward his
Ideal by a process of natural growth.3
This shows that a disciple needs careful attention in the early
stages of spiritual development. The Guru removes difficulties of
various types from the path of the disciples. However, there are
“dark hours of the soul,” as described by the Christian mystics; but
the Guru, with his own spiritual insight, understands the inner
struggles of his disciples and directs them accordingly. He fully
realizes the pitfalls on the path of spiritual effort and warns against
3 The Eternal Companion, p. 103.

195
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
such discouragement. Patanjali, Swami Vivekananda, and others
say that steady practice is absolutely necessary to overcome
obstacles;4 but when the teacher is qualified and the student is fit,
then the result is positive. “Wonderful is its teacher, and (equally)
clever the pupil. Wonderful indeed is he who comprehends it taught
by an able preceptor.”5
A great spiritual personality who is perfectly established in higher
realizations can transmit this knowledge to a disciple even if the
disciple has not undergone vigorous spiritual practices. Sri
Ramakrishna, who was born in 1836 in India, could transmit spiritual
power and various experiences immediately and directly to his
disciples. His biography contains descriptions of such occurrences.6
Swami Vivekananda was about eighteen years old when he first
went to see Sri Ramakrishna. The great Master touched the chest
of the young aspirant, who at once entered into the highest state of
superconscious realization immediately and directly. He lost his
physical consciousness in the realization of the Ultimate Reality.
One day when Swami Brahmananda was rubbing oil on the body
of Sri Ramakrishna, he too entered into superconscious realization
spontaneously and immediately. He not only lost the consciousness
of the external and objective world but he experienced the Ultimate
Reality. On another occasion, this great Master wrote a name of
God on the tongue of another disciple, who then had the realization
of the personal aspect of God, his chosen Deity. We know from the
history of that period that this great man had a peculiar power of
awakening the latent possibilities of his disciples, and that
innumerable men and women had their highest realizations from
him either by a touch, a word, a wish, or even a glance. One of the
4 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali I:13.
5 Katha Upanishad II:7.
6 Romain Rolland, The Life of Ramakrishna (Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita
Ashrama, 1931).

196
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
greatest disciples of the Master, Swami Shivananda, told us that all
of the disciples had the highest realization (Samadhi) during the
lifetime of the Master. Their lives prove to us without the least
shade of doubt that they were well established in God either through
realization of the personal (bodily) aspect or through the Impersonal
(formless) aspect of God. These two types of realization are
mentioned by St. Paul: “I knew a man in Christ . . . (whether in the
body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God
knoweth).”7
The supremely developed person not only can transmit this power
immediately and directly to a disciple who has not performed spiritual
practices, but even the disciples of these great teachers can awaken
latent spiritual power and give the higher realizations when they are
in that particular mood. We know definitely that Swami Vivekananda,
Swami Brahmananda, and others transmitted this power on certain
occasions to their disciples and devotees. It is explained by the
religious psychologists of India that still lesser personalities can also
help their disciples in awakening spiritual consciousness, provided
they themselves are established in higher realizations and the students
practice according to their advice and directions.
Two important and significant questions will arise in the minds of
many sincere persons. (1) Can a man belonging to any religion or
nationality practice yoga? (2) Can anyone have superconscious
experiences? These questions have various implications. We know
that different religious groups make exclusive claims for their
teachings. They not only say that their general religion itself is the
only way, but they also emphasize that one can reach God only
through their own particular denomination, religious attitude, school
of thought, or church. We shall quote Sri Ramakrishna, the greatest
7 II Cor. 12:2.

197
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
modern spiritual leader of India, to clarify this point. Then we can
answer the real questions. He says:
Different creeds are but different paths to reach the one God.
Various and different are the ways that lead to the temple of Mother.
. . . Similarly, various are the ways that lead to the house of the
Lord. Every religion is nothing but one of such paths that lead men
to God.
    As with one and the same substance, gold, various ornaments
are made having different names and forms, so one and the same
God is worshipped in different countries and ages under different
names and forms. . . .8
This shows that there are many paths suitable to different types
of people. Knowing this fundamental fact, we can definitely reply
to the first question that yogas can be practiced by anyone belonging
to any religion or race. There is no exclusiveness in religion. As
previously explained, yoga is the practical system for the realization
of God. As such, anyone desirous of God can and must practice
certain exercises. These practices are the different forms of yoga,
which have already been described.
Theological differences in the conception of God do not affect
the practice of yoga. Anyone belonging to any religious group with
any conception of God can practice it and be helped immensely
thereby. One can adapt the practices to his personal theological
interpretation of the Truth. Whether or not a person is qualified
depends entirely on the intensity of his desire to grow in spirituality,
regardless of religious affiliations. In other words, a Hindu, Christian,
Jew, Buddhist, or a Mohammedan is equally qualified if he has an
intense desire to live a spiritual life.
The answer to the second question is similar to that of the first.
Superconscious experiences are not the exclusive claim of any
8 Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna XXXVIII:716 and 717.

198
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
particular religion or group, although some may so express. Anyone
belonging to any religion can reach the goal of religious life if he
systematically and thoroughly practices yoga or a form of real
spiritual exercises, whether they are prescribed by a Hindu, Christian,
Jewish, Buddhist, or a Mohammedan teacher. The religious history
of the world proves to us that every one of the great religions
produced many men and women of superconscious realization. It is
true that there is a difference in their experiences, as we discussed
in the previous chapter. It is not because of their racial, geographical,
or religious affiliations that they vary, but because of their
temperaments and intensity. This difference is also observed in
people belonging to the same religion and even in the disciples of
the same master, owing to temperamental diversities.

199
C H A P T E R X I I I
Religion and Psychotherapy
T
HERE is considerable dispute among many persons as to
whether or not religion can contribute anything toward the
stable working of the human mind. There are many others, however,
who feel that psychological training is absolutely necessary for the
progressive ministers of religion so that they will be able to help the
unhappy conditions of their people. Let us consider the origin of
mental disturbances to determine if religion, properly understood
and practiced, can stabilize the minds of men and lead to real
satisfaction and happiness in life.
When we study the disturbed states of the people, we recognize
three different types of functional ailments: (1) neurosis, which
originates in actual physical disorder such as defective brain matter
and nervous system; (2) psychogenic neurosis, which originates in
mental disturbances of such types as mental conflict, frustration,
and discontent; and (3) psychosis, which is mental illness.
Neurosis of purely physical origin can be treated and helped
medically by the neurologists. It requires technical knowledge to
help neurotic conditions of this type, and only the medical authorities
can be of service to such persons, as they know the structure and
functioning of the nervous system and other parts of the body.
The psychogenic neurotic conditions originate in a different source.
The mental conflicts and confusion are due to either abnormal

200
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
primary or secondary urges. The physical side can be helped only
by the neurologists or psychotherapeutists and physicians, but such
treatment cannot be beneficial unless it is supplemented by a sound
and satisfactory philosophy of life. This can only be given by a man
who has it himself, whether he is a religious man, psychiatrist,
psychologist, or a physician. Then, and then alone, can he be of
service to a person who has a psychogenic neurosis. We do not like
to limit religious leadership to the people who have adopted religious
life. A physician or a psychologist may be equally religious if he has
the proper understanding and appreciation of religious philosophy
and practices. Professor Jung agrees that higher values of life can
be given to a person only by a man who has them himself, and not
otherwise. When we were talking together one day about the utility
of the practice of concentration, he fully appreciated this view saying:
“I cannot help my neighbors to keep their gardens in proper order
unless I keep my own garden in order.” It is of vital importance in
mental training. One may be able to teach practical sciences without
integrating one’s own mind, but one cannot teach religion and mental
culture without being established in them.
The cases of psychosis can also be immensely helped by a man
of stable mind and sound philosophy. Psychosis is generated by the
conflicts, confusion, and frustration of the mind and by uncontrolled
emotions. Those tendencies can hardly be removed unless higher
values are absorbed by the person and then practically applied in
his life. When a man has the religious ideal and regulates all his
activities by it, he has a satisfactory way of life. He may fail many
times to reach the goal, yet the very attempt gives a great deal of
satisfaction and joy to the mind. In the early stages of the struggle
the conflicting elements may remain strong and cause a little disgust
and disappointment, but in the long run his whole mind becomes

201
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
unified because his activities are subordinated to the highest value
or goal of life.
There is, however, apprehension among some of the outstanding
thinkers that often religious zeal for salvation creates conflicts. But
a proper philosophy of life cannot create any conflict. However
sinful a man may be, however deplorable his conduct may be, he
always has the possibility of redemption and enlightenment. In the
teachings of Christ, St. Paul, the great Jewish mystics, and the Hindu
and Buddhist leaders, we find definite understanding of the possibility
of human change and transformation. A proper understanding of
religion and religious ideals cannot hypnotize a man into a paralytic
state nor can it create an abnormal sense of fear. On the other
hand, it gives encouragement, determination, and power to reach
the desired goal. Weaknesses are to be understood properly so that
a man can make attempts to overcome them and have satisfaction
thereby. There is great joy in the struggle of overcoming all obstacles
and weaknesses. There is also joy in achieving success in the process
of higher evolution.
Another concern among outstanding thinkers is that an
unfavorable environment is responsible for mental conflicts. It is
true that environmental conditions may create certain situations which
are not conducive to the healthy growth of mental life and spiritual
evolution. Yet poverty and mental disturbances are not simultaneous
nor are they coexistent in certain parts of the world. A man may be
poor and still have a sound philosophy of life, practicing the highest
principles of ethics and religion in his everyday life. A man of humble
economic condition need not necessarily be immoral or mentally
restless. We find many persons of humble circumstances who
possess deep spiritual qualities and mental stability in some of the
Oriental countries because of their sound philosophy of life and its

202
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
practical application. We know many noble souls in India who
became great personalities in spite of their poverty.
Ancient and modern spiritual leaders, through their lives and
teachings, remove all conflicts and frustration of the people and
give a sound basis for real happiness. These principles have kept
the people of India as well as early Christian civilizations peaceful
and harmonious. Mental and functional diseases have been seldom
found in them. We also observe that not only these great religious
leaders but also some of their followers, who really organized their
lives on a spiritual basis, have been the happiest persons of the
world. Their lives prove to us, without the least shadow of doubt,
that conflicts and frustration can be completely dissolved by the
practice of spiritual philosophy in everyday living.
Sri Ramakrishna and other ancient and modern Hindu teachers
tell us that God is Bliss. Anyone who meditates on Bliss, or God,
gets unbounded joy. Swami Brahmananda tells us:
Try to steady it [the mind] again and again, by fixing it on the
Chosen Ideal, and at last you will become absorbed in Him. If you
continue your practice for two or three years, you will begin to feel
unspeakable joy and the mind will become steady. In the beginning
the practice of japam and meditation seems dry. It’s like taking
bitter medicine. You must forcibly pour the thought of God into your
mind. As you persist you will be flooded with joy.1
When the poisonous element of hedonism is changed into a spiritual
philosophy, the chronic symptoms of modern unhappiness in various
spheres of existence automatically vanish. All the progressive laws
of social security and other insurances are noble attempts to make
people happy and secure but they will become meaningless if the
basic philosophy of life is not changed. It seems to us that they are
1 The Eternal Companion, p. 175.

203
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
doing everything to cook a good dish but are omitting the salt. All
attempts to achieve good cooking become failures if the main
seasoning is not given. Similarly, all the progressive laws and
regulations are bound to be failures in no time if man’s inner nature
is not changed. If the lawmakers and administrators of law remain
the same, then the beneficiaries of the laws will also remain the
same. Consequently, conflicts of various types will inevitably exist;
the condition of the people may be affected, but the causes will
remain operative, resulting in similar difficulties. Thus, in spite of
progressive thinking, we will enter into a vicious circle because of
the failure to understand the root cause of the disease in modern
society. All the noble attempts of modern psychiatrists will also be
failures in spite of their success in certain ways. They are, no doubt,
helping mankind in the Western Hemisphere to some extent, but
they are only temporarily ameliorating the suffering. The real removal
of the disease can only take place when psychiatry and religion in
the broadest sense of the term, amalgamate, co-operate, and co-
ordinate properly. Herein we find the utility of religion.
We know that there is skepticism and a critical attitude on the
part of some of the psychologists and psychiatrists regarding the
value of religion in psychotherapy. It is, however, conceivable that
they have justification for some of their criticism regarding certain
religious attitudes and interpretations of life. If we forget the creedal
and ritualistic difference and go back to the teachings of the great
founders of religion, we will find that there can be no two opinions
regarding the value of the religious conception of life. Men differ in
ritualism, ceremonies, and the use of symbols and forms. But these
are not the essential part of religion. The essential part of religion
emphasizes the understanding of the higher self, or God, or over

204
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
soul, and the control of the lower self or empirical self, the selfish
egocentric self. Rituals, ceremonies, creeds, doctrines, and dogmas
are the secondary part of religion. If anyone imagines that religious
duties are fulfilled when he observes certain rituals and ceremonies
and has only a belief in some personalities, then, of course,
psychiatrists or psychotherapeutists will have justification in their
criticism. On the contrary Sri Ramakrishna says:
Knowledge leads to unity, but Ignorance to diversity.
    So long as God seems to be outside and far away, there is
ignorance. But when God is realised within, that is true knowledge.
    Meditate upon the Knowledge and Bliss Eternal, and you will
also have bliss. The Bliss indeed is eternal, only it is covered and
obscured by ignorance. The less your attachment is towards the
senses, the more will be your love towards God.
    Those who wish to attain God and progress in religious devotion,
should particularly guard themselves against the snares of lust and
wealth. Otherwise they can never attain perfection.
    The sun can give heat and light to the whole world, but it can do
nothing when the clouds shut out its rays. Similarly, so long as egoism
is 
in 
the 
heart, 
God 
cannot 
shine 
upon 
it.
    Iron, after it is converted into gold by the touch of the philosopher’s
stone, may be kept under the ground or thrown into a rubbish heap;
it will always remain gold and will not return to its former condition.
Similar is the state of the man whose soul has touched even once
the feet of the Almighty Lord. Whether he dwells in the bustle of
the world, or in the solitude of the forest, nothing ever contaminates
him.2
We need to understand that religion brings out the best in man by
manifesting the divinity that is already in him. In fact, the higher
interpretation of any religion is to bring out the best in man. Swami
Vivekananda defines religion as the “manifestation of the divinity
2 Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna I:1, 33, and 38; XXI:399; XXII:460; and XXVII:565.

205
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
that is already in man.” If we understand religion properly, we cannot
help thinking that religion alone can solve the basic problem of mental
ailments. When religious practices, creeds, rituals, ceremonies,
symbols, and statues help us to manifest the divinity in us, we then
realize the goal of life. We attain joint heirship with Christ, as St.
Paul emphasizes in one of his Epistles: “. . . We are the children of
God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Christ.”3 Knowing this fact, we are compelled to think that when a
man tries to manifest the best in him, the divine nature in him, the
spirit of God in him, he cannot submit to his lower passions and
lower desires and aspirations.
The duty of religious leaders is to bring out the higher qualities
and not to emphasize ignoble tendencies or frighten one because of
his weaknesses. Religion is to help man remove the cause of conflict
and frustration by the positive method of revealing the divinity (Atma)
within him. This Reality is changeless, eternal, pure, and blissful. It
has been the experience of many scientific observers that the
religious schools which emphasize the weakness and sinful nature
of man often become the sources of discouragement, frustration,
and mental conflict, as many thinkers suspect. We are thoroughly
convinced that right understanding of the religious philosophy of
life, as prescribed and lived by the great founders of religion and
their successful followers, can create no objection for
psychotherapeutists. So we say that a broad and clear understanding
of religion can certainly be co-ordinated with the technical knowledge
of modern psychotherapy. In fact, psychotherapy, as practiced by
psychiatrists, and religious philosophy must go together. There is no
reason for the conflict between real religious leadership and real
3 Rom. 8:16 and 17.

206
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
psychotherapy.4 We are pleased to quote Professor Gordon W.
Allport:
By and large psychology has done little to give systematic setting
to all these various dynamic formations that represent the apex of
development in the mature personality. With time, no doubt, when
the errors of excessive elementarism and geneticism are cleared
away, and the principle of functional autonomy is substituted as a
general guide, the situation will improve.5
It is known to us that some of the religious leaders are rather
critical and suspicious of the methods of psychotherapy. There is,
unfortunately, mutual suspicion and skepticism on the part of both
groups in the Western countries, but this can be removed by the
proper understanding of religion. Then modern psychology would
not be antagonistic to a broad interpretation of religion, nor would
religion term psychotherapy an offshoot of the materialistic
philosophy of life. It is true that many of the psychiatrists and
psychologists in the West are materialistic in the broad sense of the
term. But our contention is that if psychology is pushed beyond the
physiological side, or “near-mind”6 as Professor Hocking calls it,
then psychologists will understand the reality behind the three
changeable states of consciousness—waking, dreaming, and sound
sleep, or conscious and subconscious.
An analysis of these three states of consciousness will convince
us that there is a permanent reality behind them. In fact, that reality
is the background of these three states; that Atma, the divine
presence in man, is the substratum of them all. The very idea of
4 Jung, Psychology and Religion; and Modern Man in Search of a Soul, chap.
XXXI.
5 Allport, Personality, A Psychological Interpretation, p. 227.
6 Hocking, Proceedings of the Sixth International Congress of Philosophy 1927),
pp. 203 and 215.

207
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
these three changeable states arises from the nonchangeable and
permanent existence behind them. Psychology properly evolved and
developed cannot help accepting a permanent reality behind the
observable states of consciousness. This is the fourth and it is called
turiya, the superconscious.
So it seems to us that psychology and religion properly understood
and developed to their logical conclusions will mingle together. In
fact, in India psychology is the basic science of spiritual evolution.
Religious leaders are also ethical and psychological leaders. It is
evident to us that a man cannot become a thoroughly religious person
unless he is established in the higher principles of ethics and
psychology. He must have a thorough knowledge of and control
over his mental states and thought processes in order to have higher
spiritual experiences, which were described in previous chapters.
On the other hand, a psychologist must also have full control
over his own mind in order to be effective in treating his clients, for
a man who has not integrated his own mind cannot help in the
integration of the minds of others. Professor Jung and some other
psychologists fully realize that unless a psychologist is established
in his own integration and unification of mind, having dissolved his
own conflicts and frustrations, he cannot be of any definite use to
his clients and students. It must be admitted, however, that modern
psychotherapy is ameliorating the suffering of many persons. We
make bold to say that this will serve only as a temporary help if a
higher religious background is not furnished in removing the cause
of disturbance. This means that psychological theory alone cannot
make one a psychiatrist. He must also apply the psychological
principles in his own personal life. This leads us to the conclusion
that a psychotherapeutist must be a religious man in the broader
sense of the term. He may differ from others in his conception of
God. He may also differ in the methods of integration of his emotions,

208
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
thought, and will according to his own natural tendencies and
aptitudes. This broad principle is applicable in the higher phases of
religion. Therefore, a good practicing psychotherapeutist and a good
religious leader should have mental peace and happiness in common.
From the Hindu point of view, psychology and religion can never be
antagonistic; rather they are the two phases of the same branch of
knowledge.
Both religious leaders and psychiatrists should work together for
the elimination of mental disorder and conflicts. By their lives they
should inspire the average man and woman. Religious leadership
should furnish the philosophy or way of life and show the practical
application of that philosophy in everyday living by subordinating all
activities to the ideal; while psychiatrists and psychologists should
furnish their technical knowledge and its application in individual
cases. Of course, the persons who have organic neurosis or who
have psychosis due to organic troubles should be handled entirely
by the psychologists and neurologists of technical and medical
knowledge, while the religious leaders should always be prepared
to be of service to both the psychiatrists and the clients.

209
C H A P T E R X I V
Philosophy of Life
M
ANY thoughtful persons are distressed when they observe
the condition of the mental health of modern men and
women. In fact, the systems of Freud, Jung, Adler, and others prove
to us that these great thinkers have been extremely concerned about
the mental condition of the people. When we study the statistical
reports of the hospitals, we find that most of the cases can be
classified into two groups: actual mental cases and functional
disorders. The functional elements are really created by the
maladjustment of mind which may have different emotional
disturbances, complexes, dissatisfactions, and frustrations that react
on the whole nervous system and result in nerve ailments and
disorders. Modern psychiatrists are trying to find a remedy for
removing the conflicts and frustrations and establishing harmony in
the mind. Noble attempts are being made by outstanding psychiatrists
of Europe and America to solve the mental problems of the people.
It is often asked whether or not religious leaders can be of any
service in restoring the mental health of the people. Some of the
psychiatrists seem to feel that the type of religion which is known
to them does positive harm to mental health. An investigation was
conducted by Professor J. McVicker Hunt of Brown University
which revealed unfortunate factors in the lives of some of the mental

210
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
cases of a prominent hospital in this country, as a result of emphasis
on negative rather than positive qualities in man.1 Other psychiatrists
seem to feel that religion itself becomes a factor in creating conflict
in the mind. As we related in the first and preceding chapters, many
Freudians criticize religion for the mental harm they say it has caused.
Their contention is that the mind cannot have natural expression of
primitive urges because of religious fear, and so conflict is created
and continues until the breaking point is reached.
We also observe that many of the Western psychologists try to
solve the problem of conflict and frustration by keeping to the old
hedonistic or pleasure theory of life. They seem to take it for granted
that the primary objective of life is the greatest pleasure of the
individual on the sense plane. Freud, in his book, Beyond the
Pleasure Principle, discusses the pleasure and death instincts and
he says: “I cannot believe in the existence of such [an impulse
toward perfection] and I see no way of preserving the pleasing
illusion.”2 In the same chapter he gives confusing ideas, to say the
least, and shows practically no hope for human stability as he says:
“Substitution or reaction formations and sublimations avail nothing
toward relaxing the continual tension.”3 He and his followers do
not seem to give a sound philosophy for removing difficulties, conflicts,
and frustrations from human minds. Even when some advocates of
the humanistic principle consider “the greatest happiness of the
greatest number,” the primary emphasis is given to the greatest
pleasure of the individual concerned.
We cannot understand how a person can remove conflicts and
frustrations by fostering hedonistic philosophy. It seems to us that
frustration is inevitable so long as pleasure remains the primary
1 J. McV. Hunt, “Social Conflict in Psychosis,” The American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, VIII (January, 1938).
2 Sigmund Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle (London: International
Psychoanalytic Press, 1922), p. 52.
3 Ibid., p. 53.

211
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
objective of life. After all, this pleasure is limited to the sense plane.
When we analyze it, we find that it is achieved in its greatest quantity
when the senses are in harmonious contact with the sense objects.
This harmonious contact will inevitably vary according to the changes
in life; by their very nature they are changeable and impermanent.4
The child has certain attitudes of enjoyment which change when it
enters adolescence. Then again, the enjoyments of adolescents are
not the same as those of adults. Grown-up and middle-aged persons
cannot have the same types of pleasure as when their bodies were
vigorous and strong, so their interests become different. These stages
of life are inevitable, however we may dislike them. On the other
hand, sense objects also change. We like to be with a particular
friend, but when he changes we cease to like him. Often we find
that the very person who once inspired our happiness becomes
repulsive to us. Variations are inevitable both in those who enjoy
the sense objects and in the objects themselves. Conditions of life
and environments also change. The people who cannot adjust
themselves to the variable conditions of life are bound to be full of
conflicts and frustration; they are bound to be unhappy. This is
especially true when they have a philosophy which emphasizes only
the pleasurable aspects of life in the objective realm. Conflicts created
by sense impulse or self-expression will become extremely disturbing
if one persists in using these expressions only as the objective of
happiness. Professor Jung in his book, Modern Man in Search of
a Soul, aptly ridicules the women who like to be called “younger
sisters of their daughters.” However, we can see why mature
persons would want to imitate their daughters if the primary objective
of life is the greatest amount of pleasure on the sense plane. It
seems to us that those unnatural ways of expression are inevitable
4 Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita II:14.

212
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
if one persists in the hedonistic point of view of life. So to our mind
it is impossible for any kind of psychology to be effective and of
permanent value in any society or nation, if that psychology does
not change the philosophy of life. Therefore, as long as man seeks
only pleasure on the sense plane as the primary objective of life,
there are bound to be mental disturbances and ailments of the modern
type. The mind will remain dissatisfied and unhappy, resulting in the
various kinds of mental and physical ailments which we observe in
the West.
We may be challenged for our evaluation of the modern Western
outlook of life. Some may contend that we are underestimating this
civilization. They are likely to say that religious people are generally
other-worldly and, consequently, they unjustly criticize the present
system of life. Let us consider the situation carefully from a
comprehensive point of view.
Every civilization and every society has an ideal for which it
works. All the activities are regulated in a way that the ideal may
be expressed and fulfilled in and through the individuals and
institutions of that particular society. Social, economic, political, and
even religious systems are planned to fulfill that purpose. It may
seem strange that we say even religion is used for expression of a
collective ideal, but critical and unbiased observation of modern
society will prove this to be true. The educational systems are also
conditioned by that ideal; in fact, a man’s whole life is expressed
for its manifestation.
An individual also forms an ideal for which he works. He regulates
his activities in order to express his primary objective of life and he
prepares himself for that goal, whatever it may be. A person may
have one of various ideals to integrate himself or his society. Eduard
Spranger of Germany, and some other thinkers belonging to that
school, enumerate the ideals that are taken up by the people. He

213
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
tells us that there are six types: theoretical, economic, esthetic, social,
political, and religious.5 (1) A theoretical type of man takes the ideal
of knowledge and truth. His supreme interest is to seek knowledge
and truth in every aspect of his life. He directs his attention to
philosophy, ethics, and pure science and he tries to regulate his life
accordingly. (2) The economic man’s aim is to fulfill the physical
needs of life. He is practical in his economic adjustment,
accumulation of wealth, and its use for pleasure on the sense plane.
His sole aim is pleasure, and his education and even religion are
used for that purpose. (It is interesting to note that universities and
schools have only one aim and that is to make man fit for the sole
purpose of economic security and power.) (3) The esthetic ideal
inspires a man to find beauty. To him the beautiful is true and real.
A poet and an artist find the expression of life in the esthetic ideal,
and their lives are regulated accordingly. (4) The social ideal of
man directs him to improve the social conditions of life. He considers
the welfare of man. He is unselfish and sympathetic and expresses
these tendencies in and through his everyday life. (5) The political
man aims at the manifestation of power. His sole objective is in the
political functioning of life. His interest in his fellow beings is based
on an egocentric attitude, and all his activities are regulated by the
urge of power. (6) The religious ideal inspires a man to find God.
Unity and harmony are the objectives of his life. His activities are
directed toward the fulfillment of unity in the highest sense of the
term. He also prepares himself for that ideal.
When we study these six ideals of Spranger carefully, we can
classify them in two groups: religious and hedonistic. Of course,
there may be differences in the emphasis and application of the
ideals in life, but it seems to us that the mainsprings of action can be
5 Eduard Spranger, Types of Man (New York: G. E. Stechert & Co., 1928).

214
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
traced to either religious understanding or pleasure on the sense
plane. Economic and political ideals are directly on the sense plane,
while religious types mean seeking unity on the spiritual plane.
Esthetic, social, and theoretical types may turn to either side as
they flourish in cultures which are either sensual or religious.
Modern Western society directs its activities mainly on the sense
plane. Since the Renaissance, the West has achieved wonderful
results by the use of positive and applied science based on hedonism;
but it has also created the cause of all the contemporary troubles in
individual and collective life. There is no need for clarification;
present evidences make the statement only too obvious. The
conditions of present society, the structure of the family, and the life
of the individual would convince even a child of the validity of this
statement. Professor Pitirim A. Sorokin in his masterly work, The
Crisis of Our Age, calls the present Western civilization “sensate,”
while a religious society is “ideational.” He also finds an “idealistic”
civilization in which both are blended with “reason.”
Individuals are affected by the philosophy which a society holds
as an ideal. Of course, it is true that a civilization is originally built
upon the ideal that is chosen by the strong personalities of that
group. The present system of the West happens to be “sensate.”
We need not discuss how it took this turn; but we know that all
activities are regulated by this ideal. It is interesting to note that
even social principles, science of psychology, and other such
branches of knowledge and institutions aim at that one objective.
We have shown that “action” psychology expresses the inherent
tendency of the sensate outlook on life; man’s intelligence is
evaluated by his capabilities for action. We observe that the great
educationalists are emphasizing technology and applied sciences
more and more, as they know that they can achieve the highest
good of their ideal in that way; and thereby they can give the greatest

215
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
pleasure to the people on the sense plane. We are afraid that the
universities are being converted into great technological institutions
instead of centers of culture for the head and heart. This is inevitable
where sense pleasures are chosen as the goal of life. The result is
equally axiomatic. Any farsighted man can easily predict future
conditions after observing the major trend of thought in a society.
Swami Vivekananda predicted the present crisis about fifty years
ago. The great Swami says:
In the West, they are trying to solve the problem how much a
man can possess, and we are trying here to solve the problem on
how little a man can live. This struggle and this difference will still
go on for some centuries. But if history has any truth in it, and if
prognostications ever prove true, it must be that those who train
themselves to live on the least and control themselves well, will in
the end gain the battle, and that those who run after enjoyment and
luxury, however vigorous they may seem for the moment, will have
to die and become annihilated.6
Hedonism, however modified and qualified, cannot solve the
problems of modern life. It is true that noble attempts in this field
were made by Auguste Comte and such other humanists. There
have been attempts by Karl Marx and his followers to ward off the
evils that are produced by basic hedonistic philosophy and its results.
It is clear that the pleasure theory of life rationalizes selfishness,
greed, and love of power and position. This point of view has created
great frustration both individually and collectively. A survey of
historical events will reveal to us that the whole trouble with modern
life arises in a wrong outlook and wrong philosophy. The great high
priests of the French Revolution and the Marxian philosophers meant
well in prescribing certain remedies for modern evils, but it is also
equally evident that their treatment of modern disease is sym?tomatic
6 Works, III, 181.

216
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
and like patchwork. An economic readjustment and equal distribution
of the commodities of life cannot be achieved on the basis of the
doctrine that pleasure is the chief good in life. The utilitarian
philosophy of the greatest pleasure for the greatest number sounds
very well, yet it doesn’t give any real basis for a man to sacrifice
his pleasure for the happiness of another.
Superficial thinkers can find a certain kind of remedy in humanism
and Marxian and utilitarian philosophy for existing inequality. They
may temporarily remedy certain economic and social evils, but they
cannot reach the life of man. Unless his inner life is changed, conflicts
and frustration will always remain. We have to consider that if we
base our lives on the sense plane and make it all in all there will be
inevitable frustration and disappointment, as we have already
explained. The remedies that are prescribed by such thinkers,
however well-meaning they are, seem to be extremely superficial
and shortsighted. It seems that these thinkers are acting like
shortsighted physicians who try to cure a chronic case of rheumatism
by removing the pain from the ankle to the knee and from the knee
to the elbow. Chronic rheumatism cannot be removed completely
and thoroughly unless the cause is removed from the blood stream,
which must be purified in order to be free from the various symptoms
of rheumatism. However noble the attempt may be to remove the
pain from the ankle or the knee, it will persist until the fundamental
cause is altogether eliminated from the system. Similarly, we cannot
remove the chronic rheumatism of unhappiness, mental conflicts,
and frustration so long as the poisonous philosophy of life, pleasure
on the sense plane, remains the ultimate objective of life. That is
the very reason Swami Vivekananda advocated what he called root

217
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
and branch reform. That is to say, he did not approve the
symptomatic treatment of superficial thinkers; and he wanted to
introduce a complete change of philosophy from hedonism to the
manifestation of divinity in man, with Paramartha as the supreme
goal of life.
We quote Professor Sorokin:
We have seen that modern sensate culture emerged with a
major belief that true reality and true value were mainly or
exclusively sensory. Anything that was supersensory was either
doubtful as a reality or fictitious as a value. It either did not
exist or, being unperceivable by the senses, amounted to the
non-existent. Respectively, the organs of senses, with the secondary
help of human reason, were made the main arbiter of the true and
false, of the real and unreal, and of the valuable and valueless. Any
charismatic-supersensory and superrational revelation, any mystic
experience, any truth of faith, began to be denied, as a valid
experience, a valid truth, and a genuine value. The major premise
of the sensory nature of the true reality and value is the root
from which developed the tree of our sensate culture with its
splendid as well as its poisonous fruit. Its first positive fruit is
an unprecedented development of the natural sciences and
technological inventions. The first poisonous fruit is a fatal
narrowing of the realm of the true reality and true value.7
The learned professor gives a solution:
. . . the concerted preparation for the shift implies the deepest
reexamination of the main premises and values of sensate culture,
rejection of its superannuated pseudo-values and
reenthronement of the real values it has discarded. The general
line of such a reexamination and reevaluation lies in the direction of
the integralist conception of truth, reality, . . . From the integralist
standpoint, the present antagonism between science, religion,
philosophy, ethics, and art is unnecessary, not to mention
7 Pitirim A. Sorokin, The Crisis of Our Age (New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc.,
1941), p. 311.

218
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
disastrous. In the light of an adequate theory of true reality
and value, they all are one and all serve one purpose: the
unfolding of the Absolute in the relative empirical world, to the
greater nobility of Man and to the greater glory of God. As
such they should and can cooperate in the fulfillment of this
greatest task.
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  
Our remedy demands a complete change of the contemporary
mentality, a fundamental transformation of our system of values,
and the profoundest modification of our conduct toward other
men, cultural values, and the world at large.8
So society and individuals must change their outlook. Hedonistic
philosophy will completely rob a man of what he really seeks—
happiness. He wholly defeats this primary purpose of his life by
hedonism, as we observe. The philosophy of history convinces us
that the only way out is to change the present attitude of life and
establish the religious ideal. All the religious leaders ancient and
modern—the great founders of religion like Christ, Buddha, Krishna,
and Sri Ramakrishna, as well as their followers—emphasized the
attainment of peace and happiness on the divine plane. We read in
the Upanishads: “Yo vai vhuma tat sukham nalpe sukhamasti.”
“The Infinite is bliss; there is no bliss in what is small (finite).”9
Jesus says: “For what shall a man be profited, if he shall gain the
whole world, and forfeit his soul? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?”10 And St. Paul says: “For to be carnally
minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace.”11
According to Buddha: “The gift of religion exceeds all gifts; the
8 Ibid., pp., 316-21.
9 Chhandogya Upanishad, chap. VII, sec. 23.
10 Matt. 16:26.
11 Rom. 8:6.

219
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
sweetness of religion exceeds all sweetness; the delight of religion
exceeds all delight; the extinction of thirst overcomes all things.”12
Sri Krishna repeatedly emphasizes in the Gita that abiding happiness
can only be reached by knowing the Self, or God, and making the
activities of life on this plane of ours subordinate to the achievement
of permanent knowledge of the reality of God. He declares: “That
man who lives devoid of longing, abandoning all desires, without the
sense of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ he attains to peace.”13 Similarly, Sri
Ramakrishna challenges the whole modern outlook of life, the
pleasure theory, and declares that “the soul that has tasted the
sweetness of divine bliss finds no happiness in the common pleasures
of the world.”14 Swami Vivekananda’s advice to the people of India
is applicable to the whole world today; in fact, the world is one.
Every nation and every individual is more or less affected by the
present outlook of hedonism. Says the great Swami:
And, therefore, if you succeed in the attempt to throw off your
religion and take up either politics or society, or any other thing as
your centre, as the vitality of your national life, the result will be,
that you will become extinct. To prevent this you must make all and
everything work through that vitality of your religion. Let all your
nerves vibrate through the backbone of your religion.15
Let us now be specific as to what we mean by a “religious” view
of life. The Hindu view, which is for that matter the religious view,
is to make the spiritual goal (Paramartha) the primary objective of
human life. It means that man’s supreme objective is to realize his
divine nature (Atma), as we have already said. We are again
reminding ourselves that “religion is the manifestation of divinity in
12 Dhammapada (Sayings of Buddha), chap. XIV.
13 Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita II:71.
14 Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna XXXI:603.
15 Works, III, 220.

220
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
man,” as Swami Vivekananda declares. All other effort in life must
be subordinated to that supreme goal. Let not anyone think that we
are trying to ignore the existence of man’s other cravings and that
we want to create a utopian world and deny human cravings in the
real world. We are not “dreamers” and “visionaries” as people often
say, nor are we other-worldly. What we mean is that all activities
on this relative plane must be subordinated to that supreme goal of
life, instead of making the accumulation of money, supremacy over
others, and the greatest pleasure the ultimate objectives. Let us not
have all the functions of a man subservient to these pleasures.
We all admit that man has a desire to be happy in this sense
world in various ways. He has access to the storehouse of nature
and he naturally wants to use and enjoy it physically in every possible
way. He wants to utilize all the forces of nature for his own comforts.
His artistic and esthetic nature must be satisfied and his poetic and
intellectual powers fulfilled. His emotional life has to be satisfied
and harmonized. Otherwise there will be frustration and conflict.
Consequently, the mind will remain an arena of disturbing urges.
Man also needs proper training and equipment in order to gratify all
his aspirations and hopes, desires and ambitions. We do not mean
that they are to be crushed and repressed in order to follow the
religious point of view. No religious leader—either of Hindu,
Christian, or any other type—will ignore the facts of existence.
What we suggest is to remember that those aspirations and drives
must be allowed to have expression in harmony with the religious
ideal. In other words, they should be expressed in such a way that
we can reach the goal by utilizing them. Let not their expressions
be obstacles and hindrances to the fulfillment of life. Let these
desires and urges be handmaids of religious unfoldment. Let them
be helpful to religious development toward the supreme goal
(Paramartha).

221
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
We need proper equipment and practical training for the
enjoyment of physical, intellectual, and esthetic expressions. This
training should be given in a way that it does not run contrary to the
supreme objective. Therefore, we need to follow ethical principles.
Education, social relationships, and other human contacts and
institutions must also be under that ideal. Political and economic
systems must be subordinated to that supreme goal. In fact, one’s
whole life should be regulated accordingly, if one wants to eliminate
mental conflicts and disturbances.
If we have this interpretation of life and sufficient strength to
reach the goal, in and through our hopes and aspirations regulated
by the higher principles of ethics, then the supreme ideal can be
attained, as we have already quoted from the Gita. Sri Ramakrishna
also gave the same idea to show how one can live in the world a life
of the Supreme Reality. He says:
As a boy holding to a post or pillar whirls about it with head-long
speed without fear of falling, so perform thy worldly duties, fixing
thy hold firmly upon God, and thou shalt be free from danger . . . so
be in the world but always remember Him. . . .16
In this way we may have the secondary objectives—physical,
intellectual, emotional, and esthetic expressions—and not be affected
by them. Then, and then alone, can we remove the causes of conflicts
and frustrations of the mind. Our behavior becomes harmonious
and stable. Nerves become strong. The mind is then full of joy and
peace, nay, the supreme goal of human life is reached. Let us
remember what Swami Vivekananda says:
Each soul is potentially divine. The goal is to manifest this Divinity
within, by controlling nature, external and internal. Do this either by
16 Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna XXXIV:631.

222
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
work, or worship, or psychic control, or philosophy, by one or more
or all of these—and be free. This is the whole of religion. Doctrines,
or dogmas, or rituals, or books, or temples, or forms are but
secondary details.17
17 Works, I, 257.

APPENDIX

225
A P P E N D I X
Vedanta in America 1
The questions asked by every newcomer who enters a Vedanta
temple, lecture room, or center are, quite naturally, almost always
the same.
What is this place? What do you do here? What is taught? What
is Vedanta? Who is Brahman? What does Swami mean?
Vedanta (or Hinduism, as it is usually, but less correctly, called) is
the philosophy which has been evolved from the teachings of the
Vedas. The Vedas are a collection of ancient Indian scriptures, the
oldest religious writings which exist in the world. More generally,
the term “Vedanta” includes not only the Vedas themselves but the
whole mass of literature which has developed from them, right down
to the present day. Vedanta Philosophy is the common basis of
India’s many sects. Indeed, as will be shown, it demonstrates the
essential unity of all religions. It is a sort of philosophical algebra, in
terms of which all religious truth can be expressed.
Vedanta teaches three fundamental truths:
1. That Man’s real nature is divine.
If, in this universe, there is an underlying Reality, a Godhead,
then that Godhead must be omnipresent. If the Godhead is
omnipresent, It must be within each one of us and within every
creature and object. Therefore Man, in his true nature, is God.
2. That it is the aim of Man’s life on earth to unfold and manifest
1 From a leaflet put out by the Vedanta Society.

226
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
this Godhead, which is eternally existent within him, but hidden.
The differences between man and man are only differences in
the degree to which the Godhead is manifest. All ethics are merely
a means to the end of this divine unfoldment. “Right” action is action
which assists the unfoldment of the Godhead within us: “wrong”
action is action which hinders that unfoldment. “Good” and “evil”
are, therefore, only relative values, and must not be used as an
absolute standard by which we judge others. Each individual has an
individual problem and an individual path of development. But the
goal is the same for all.
Because Man is divine, he has infinite strength and infinite wisdom
at his command, if he will use them to uncover his true nature. This
nature can be gradually uncovered and known and entered into by
means of prayer, meditation and the living of a disciplined life—that
is to say, a life which seeks to remove all obstacles to the divine
unfoldment. Such obstacles are desire, fear, hatred, possessiveness,
vanity and pride. The Vedantist prefers the word “obstacle” to the
word “sin” because, if we think of ourselves as sinners and
miserable, we forget the Godhead within us and lapse into that mood
of doubt, despondency and weakness which is the greatest obstacle
of all.
Because the Godhead is within each one of us, Vedanta teaches
not merely the brotherhood, but the identity of man with man. It
says: “Thou art That.” Every soul is your own soul. Every creature
is yourself. If you harm anyone, you harm yourself. If you help
anyone, you help yourself. Therefore, all feelings of separateness,
exclusiveness, intolerance and hatred are not only “wrong,” they
are the blackest ignorance, because they deny the existence of the
omnipresent Godhead, which is One.
3. That truth is universal.
Vedanta accepts all the religions of the world, because it
recognizes the same divine inspiration in all. Different religions suit
different races, cultures, temperaments. Every religion, like every

227
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
individual, is involved in a certain measure of ignorance. But Vedanta
does not concern itself with that ignorance. It insists on the underlying
truth.
Vedanta is impersonal, but it accepts all the great prophets,
teachers and sons of God, and all those personal aspects of the
Godhead who are worshipped by different religions. According to
Vedanta “truth is one; men call it by various names.” That truth is
what they call Brahman. The Vedantic belief is that all are
manifestations of the one Godhead. Accepting all, it does not attempt
to make converts. It only seeks to clarify our thought, and thus help
us to a truer appreciation of our own religion and its ultimate aim.
Throughout the centuries, Indian Vedanta has produced many
great saints and illumined teachers. The latest and in some respects
the greatest of these was Sri Ramakrishna (1836-1886).
Sri Ramakrishna spent most of his adult life near Calcutta, living
in the grounds of a temple, on the bank of the Ganges. His life
expressed, to a greater degree than that of any other teacher, the
Vedantic idea of religious universality. After many years of self-
discipline and meditation, he reached that realization of identity with
the Godhead which Christians call the “mystic union” and Hindus
“samadhi.” But this did not satisfy him. He then proceeded to test
the universality of other religions, including Christianity and Islam.
Thus, he was able to say with absolute authority that all religions
are true and that the Ultimate Reality can be known by a member
of any sect, if his devotion is equal to the task.
Most of Sri Ramakrishna’s intimate disciples were young men
and boys. After the passing away of their Master they formed a
small monastic community which later grew into the Ramakrishna
Order. They lived together, or wandered about the country, enduring
great hardships and extreme poverty and they realized the highest
form of samadhi (superconsciousness) in various ways. Through
the Ramakrishna Order the message of the harmony of religions is
being spread all over the world.

228
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
A Swami is a monk and a religious teacher. He has nothing to do
with mystery mongering or occultism or any such expressions of
power. He is primarily devoted to God and helps others to do the
same. He becomes a monk for the good and happiness of all and he
renders loving service to humanity with no racial or religious
differentiation.

229
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
B o o k s
ABHEDANANDA, SWAMI. Christian Science and Vedanta. San Francisco: Vedanta Ashrama,
1902.
———. How to Be a Yogi. Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math.
———. Reincarnation. Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math.
ALEXANDER, FRANZ. The Medical Value of Psychoanalysis. London: Allen & Unwin,
1936.
ALLENS, RUDOLPH. The Psychology of Character. London: Sheed & Ward, 1943.
ALLPORT, GORDON W. Personality, A Psychological Interpretation. London: Constable,
1937.
Basic Writings of Saint Thomas Aquinas. Vol. I. Edited and annotated by Anton C.
Pegis. New York: Random House, Inc., 1945.
Bhagavad-Gita. Translated by Swami Prabhavananda and Christopher Isherwood.
Hollywood: The Marcel Rodd Co., 1944. Also, Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. Translated
by Swami Swarupananda. 5th ed. Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama,
1933.
Bhagavatam.
BINGER, CARL. The Doctor’s Job. New York: W. W. Norton & Co., Inc., 1945.
BORING, EDWIN G. A History of Experimental Psychology. London: Appleton, 1929.
BRIGHTMAN, EDGAR S. A Philosophy of Religion. New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1940.
———. The Problem of God. New York: The Abingdon Press, 1930.
BROWN, WILLIAM. Science and Personality. Oxford University Press, 1929.
BUTLER, DON CUTHBERT. Western Mysticism. London: Constable & Co., 1922.
Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, The. Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita
Ashrama. Vols. I-VII. Karma Yoga and Raja Yoga (including the Yoga Aphorisms
of Patanjali), Vol, I; Jnana Yoga, Vol. II; Bhakti Yoga and Lectures from Columbo
to Almora, Vol. III; Inspired Talks, Vol. VII.
Dhammapada (Sayings of Buddha).
DUTT, D. M. The Six Ways of Knowing. London: George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., 1932.
EDDINGTON, A. S. Nature of the Physical World. London: Macmillan, 1928.
———. Philosophy of Physical Science. London: Macmillan, 1929.
Eternal Companion, The. Hollywood: Vedanta Society of Southern California, 1944.

230
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
FADIMAN, CLIFTON (ED.) I Believe. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1939.
FREUD, S0. Beyond the Pleasure Principle. London: International Psychoanalytic
Press, 1922.
———. Psychopathology of Everyday Life. T. Fisher Unwin, Ltd., 1917.
Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna. 2 vols. Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1930.
Also, The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna. Translated by Swami Nikhilananda. New
York: Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Center, 1942.
Hatha Yoga Pradipika.
HEIDBREDER, EDNA. Seven Psychologies. London: Appleton, 1933.
HENDERSON, D. K., AND GILLESPIE, R. D. A Textbook of Psychiatry. London: Oxford
University Press, 1937.
HORNEY, KAREN. Self-Analysis. London: Kegan Paul, 1942.
JAMES, WILLIAM. “ The Energies of Man.” Memories and Studies. London: Longmans,
1911.
———. Varieties of Religious Experiences. London: Longmans, 1929.
JONES, RUFUS M. Studies in Mystical Religion. London: Macmillan, 1923.
JUNG, CARL G. Integration of the Personality. Translated by Stanley Dell. London:
Kegan Paul, 1939.
———. Modern Man in Search of a Soul. London: Kegan Paul, 1935.
———. Psychology and Religion. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1938.
———. Psychology of the Unconscious. London: Kegan Paul, 1931.
KEMPIS, THOMAS À. The Following of Christ. New York: Catholic Publishing Co.
LAWRENCE, BROTHER. The Practice of the Presence of God. New York: Fleming H.
Revell Co., 1895.
LEVINE, ALBERT J. Current Psychologies. Cambridge: Sci-Art Publishers, 1940.
Life of St. Teresa of Jesus, The. Autobiography. Translated by David Lewis. London:
Thomas Baker, 1924.
Life of Sri Ramakrishna. 3rd ed. Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama,
1929. Also ROLLAND, ROMAIN. The Life of Ramakrishna. Mayavati, Almora,
Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama, 1931.
MCDOUGALL, WILLIAM. Outline of Abnormal Psychology. London: Methuen, 1926.
Meister Eckhart. Translated by Blakney. 2nd ed. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1944.
MAIER, N. R. F., AND SCHNEIRLA, T. C. Principles of Animal Psychology. New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1935.
MENNINGER, KARL A. Love Against Hatred. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., Inc.,
1942.
———. Man Against Himself. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., Inc., 1938.
MÜLLER-FREINFELS, RICHARD. Evolution of Modern Psychology. Translated by W. Béran
Wolfe. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1935.
NEW TESTAMENT. Holy Bible. Matthew, Mark, Romans, and II Corinthians.
OTTO, RUDOLF. Mysticism East and West. Translated by Bertha L. Bracey and Richenda
C. Payne. London: Macmillan, 1932.
———. The Idea of the Holy. Translated by John W. Harvey. London: Humphrey
Milford, Oxford University Press, 1925.

231
I T S M E A N I N G F O R T H E W E S T
PATANJALI. Yoga Aphorisms.
PRATT, JAMES BISSELL. The Religious Consciousness. New York: Macmillan Co., 1920.
RHINE, JOSEPH BANKS, AND OTHERS. Extrasensory Perceptions after Sixty Years. London:
Faber, 1940.
———. New Frontiers of the Mind. London: Faber, 1937.
ROGERS, CARL R. Counseling and Psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.,
1942.
SARADANANDA, SWAMI. Sri Sri Ramakrishna Lilaprasanga. Vol. II, Sadhaka Bhava.
Calcutta: Udbohan Office.
Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna. Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1925.
SCHOLEM, GERSHOM G. Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism. Jerusalem: Schoken Publishing
House, 1941.
SEAL, SIR B. N. The Positive Sciences of the Ancient Hindus. London: Longmans,
1915.
SOROKIN, PITIRIM A. The Crisis of Our Age. New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1942.
Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda. 2nd ed. Mylapore, Madras: Sri
Ramakrishna Math, 1933.
SPRANGER, EDUARD. Types of Man. New York: G. E. Stechert & Co., 1928.
STROMBERG, GUSTAF. The Soul of the Universe. Philadelphia: David McKay Co., 1940.
SUTRAS. Narada, Bhakti Sutra; Yoga Sutra; and Vedanta (Brahma) Sutra.
Theologia Germanica. Translated by Susanna Winkworth. London: Macmillan &
Co., 1874.
THOMAS, WILLIAM I., AND ZNANIECKI, FLORIAN. The Polish Peasant in Europe and
America. Vol. III, Life Record of an Immigrant. Boston: Richard G. Badger, The
Gorham Press, 1919.
UNDERHILL, EVELYN. Mysticism. 7th ed. London: Methuen & Co., Ltd., 1918.
UPANISHADS. Chhandagya Upanishad; Katha Upanishad; Kena Upanishad;
Mandukya Upanishad; Svetasvatra Upanishad; Taittiriya Upanishad, Vol. VII,
Brahmananda Valli; and Sri Sankaracharya, Vivekachudamani.
Vedanta Paribhasa.
Vida de La Santa Madre Terasa de Jesus, La (1881). Vol. I (in D. Vicinti de Fuenti,
Abras de Santa Terasa de Jesus).
Vivarana Prameya Samgraha.
WATSON, JOHN B. Behaviorism. London: Kegan Paul.
Way of Perfection. London: Thomas Baker, 1935.
WOODWORTH, ROBERT S. Contemporary Schools of Psychology. New York: The Ronald
Press Co., 1931.
Yoga. Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama; and New York: Ramakrishna-
Vedanta Society. The different systems of yoga are separately published in Mayavati,
Almora, Himalayas by the Advaita Ashrama; and in New York by the Ramakrishna-
Vedanta Society.

232
H I N D U P S Y C H O L O G Y
Articles
ALLPORT, GORDON W. “The Psychology of Participation,” The Psychological Review,
LII (May, 1945), 117-31.
CARLSON, A. J. “Science and the Supernatural,” Scientific Monthly, LIX (August, 1944),
85-95.
HOCKING, W. E. “Mind and Near-Mind,” Proceedings of the Sixth International
Congress of Philosophy, Edited by Edgar Sheffield Brightman. New York: Longmans,
Green & Co., 1927, pp. 203 and 215.
HUNT, J. MCV. “Social Conflict in Psychosis,” The American Journal of Orthopsychiatry,
VIII (January, 1938).
“ Importance of Introducing Psychiatry into General Internship, The,” Journal of
the American Medical Association, CII (1934), 982-86 and 1231-32.
PRATT, JOSEPH H. The Influence of Emotions in the Causation and Cure of
Psychoneuroses. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co., 1934. Reprinted from
International Clinics, Vol. IV, Series 44.

233
Absolute
aspects of, 117, 120, 164, 179
Atma, divine nature in man, 205,
206, 219
experience of, 120, 128, 136, 153,
155, 164, 167, 190, 195; see
also Religious realization
faith leads to, 81
knowledge of, 138, 160, 176, 178,
219
manifestations of 86, 167, 218
meditation on, 114, 115, 120, 121,
194; see also Meditation
methods to reach 177, 184
nature of, 116, 117, 138, 151, 205,
218
psychic powers obstacles to, 112
relation to mind, 29
relation so soul, 30
underlying principle, 29, 205, 206,
219
union with, 164, 166, 183
worship of, 189
Absolutists, 116, 177, 178
ADLER, 7, 16, 18, 42, 64, 65, 70, 72,
209
Adlerian theories, 73
ALEXANDER, FRANZ, 6, 45
ALLERS, RUDOLPH, 17
ALLPORT, GORDON W., 3, 11, 17, 101,
206
American Philosophical Association,
178
Analysis; see Psychoanalysis
Antahkarana (mind, inner instrument),
27, 29
ARISTOTLE, 30
Asana (posture), 105, 108
Asceticism, 104
Atma, Atman; see Absolute
Autognosis, 63, 64, 71, 135
Autosuggestion, 61, 160
BAIN, 10
Bashi karan; see Hypnotism
BEGG, A. S., 6
Behavior, 9, 10, 42, 54, 55, 135, 137,
148, 221
Behaviorism, 10
Behaviorists; see Psychologists
Bhakti Yoga (path of love and
devotion), 174, 178, 184, 186,
187
Bhava (ecstatic spiritual emotion),
165, 166
Bhavas (emotional relationships with
God), 180, 181
BINGER, CARL, 7, 59
BORING, EDWARD G., 14
BOSE, SIR J. C., 23, 31
Boston Dispensary, 43, 133
BOWNE, 116
BRAID, 54
Brahman; see Absolute
BRAHMANANDA, SWAMI
on dualism and non-dualism, 121,
122
his effect on Indian culture, 153
on initiation, 122
life of, 101
on meditation, 105, 119, 124, 125,
202
on necessity of a Guru, 192
on samadhi, 164, 165, 167, 170,
172
on spiritual methods, 181, 182, 189,
194, 202
teachings of, 19, 166
transmitted spiritual power, 196
Breathing exercises, 84, 105, 109, 123
Index

234
INDEX
BRENTANO, 14, 16
BRIGHTMAN, EDGAR S., 98, 116
BROWN, WILLIAM, 2, 3, 7, 64, 72, 80,
92, 94, 95
BUDDHA, 97, 99, 101, 112, 114, 131,
149, 161, 165, 181, 218
Buddhist, 17, 102, 114, 116, 153, 184,
186, 197, 201
BURLINGAME, C. C. 6
CARLSON, A. J., 137, 138, 143
CARREL, ALEXIS, 3, 87
“Censorship,” 56, 58
Character, 17, 99
Charbakas (materialists of India), 23
CHARCOT, 18, 54, 93
Chitta (mind-stuff), 29, 174
CHRIST, JESUS, 79, 88, 97, 99, 101, 110,
112, 114, 131, 146, 150, 151,
161, 164, 171, 175, 181, 196,
201, 205, 218
Christian mystics; see Mystics,
Christian
Christian Science, 90, 91
Civilization, 165, 166, 202, 212, 214
Clairvoyance, 12
Cognition, 26, 34-37, 102;
see also Knowledge
Complexes, 40, 56, 58, 61, 63, 69, 70,
72, 73, 93, 132, 137, 209
COMTE, AUGUST, 215
Concentration; see Meditation
Conflicts, 41-43, 48, 58-60, 62, 64,
78, 80, 83, 84, 86, 94, 103, 104,
108, 111, 130, 132, 133, 199-
203, 205-211, 216, 220, 221
Conscious, The, 8
Conscious Mind, 2, 75, 88, 194
Consciousness, 1, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 18,
19, 24, 28, 58-60, 62, 76, 106,
136, 153, 154, 156, 158, 160,
163, 166, 169, 170, 177, 178,
206, 207
Conscious plane, 1, 3, 4, 56
Conscious state, 4, 54, 74
Continence, 106
COUÉ, 94
Cultural values, 218
Culture, 8, 99, 200, 214, 215, 217
Dama (external-purification), 152, 175
Dasya (master-servant relationship
with God), 180;
see also Bhavas, Madhura, Sakhya, and
Vatsalya
DARWIN, 10
Defense reaction, 49, 56, 58
Delusions, 148, 160
Dementia praecox, 9
Desires, 39, 51, 56, 57, 58, 72, 80, 81,
82
DEWEY, 10
Dharana (concentration), 105, 110,
187
Dhyana (meditation), 105, 113, 187
189; see also Meditation
Dietetic regulations, 106, 109
Disciple; see Student
Dispassion, 105
Divine
bliss, 219
forms, 162
grace, 172, 173, 191
intervention, 172, 191
nature, 205, 219
plane, 149, 218
presence, 206
realization 191, 192; see also
Religious realization
soul is, 221
Doctor, relationship with patient, 59
Dogmas, 204, 222
Dreams, 36, 65-69, 135-137, 166
Drugs; see Narcotics
East, the, 168, 173
Eastern countries, 131
ECKERT, MEISTER, 128, 131, 167, 170,
173
EDDINGTON, A. S., 3, 33, 34, 36, 138
EDDY, MARY BAKER, 90, 91
Ego, 92, 128, 185
Egocentric, 213
Egoism, 204
Egotism, 96, 151
Elementarism, 206
Emotions, 13, 16, 26, 27, 36-49, 51-
53, 56-58, 60, 62, 69, 72, 79,
80-83, 86, 92, 94, 99, 102, 103,
107, 108, 115, 121, 131-133,
148, 154, 156, 158, 160, 176,
178-181, 200, 208; see also
Urges

235
INDEX
Epileptic seizure, 156, 157
Epistemology, 34, 36
Ethics, 82, 141, 151, 152, 175, 201,
207, 213, 217, 221
Existence,
cosmic, 97
eternal, 8
oneness of, 177
permanent, 207
planes of 35, 51
Extrasensory perceptions, 9, 12, 13,
31, 87, 142-148, 153, 162, 163,
187, 190, 191;
see also Occult powers.
FOX, GEORGE, 128
FREUD, 5, 7, 9, 16, 18, 42, 54, 61, 65,
69, 70, 72, 91, 93, 209, 210
Frustration, 5, 6, 42, 43, 52, 53, 57,
60, 62, 84, 103, 108, 130, 132,
133, 200
Functional autonomy, 206
Functional disorders, 5, 6, 21, 41-46,
49, 56, 58, 60, 62, 103, 104,
130, 133, 169, 199, 202, 209
Functionalism, 10
Geneticism, 206
GESTALT, 28
Gestaltists, 10, 16
God, 101, 138, 161, 164, 196
approached through emotions and
intellect, 131
center of life, 53, 221
conception of, 197, 207, 208
direction of, 113
existence of, 9, 158, 169
Freudian interpretation of, 69
glory of, 218
grace of, 171, 190
impersonal aspect of; see Absolute
knowledge of, 134, 151, 153, 159,
160, 167, 168, 172, 204, 219
meditation on, 110, 111, 114,
123-125, 132, 136, 179, 202
as objective, 213
personal aspects of, 109, 110, 114-
117, 119-121, 162, 163, 196
presence of, 152, 156
reached by four yogas, 175
realization of, 51-53, 73, 128,
129,
God—continued
134, 150, 153, 155,
162-164, 170-173, 176, 186,
188, 195, 197
relationships with, 51, 118, 119,
181
repetition of the name of, 68, 118,
124, 154, 181, 182, 194
spirit of, 205
understanding of, 115, 179, 203
universal ideal, 86, 87
worship of, 194
yogas lead to, 174, 175, 183, 184,
188, 189, 197
God-consciousness, 112, 173
GOLDEN, 43, 44
Grecian thinkers, 127
Guru (spiritual teacher), 60, 191-194
Hallucinations, 36, 148, 160
Hatha Yoga (physical control), 13,
107, 186, 187
Hatha Yogis, 107, 109
Hedonism, 202, 214-219
Hedonistic, 11, 210, 212, 215, 218
Heterognosis, 64
Hindu
authorities, 112, 191
culture, 99,
mystics, 102, 153
national life, 11
philosophers, 33, 75, 77
philosophy, 36, 77, 151
psychologists
on breathing exercises, 84, 109
on concentration; see on
meditation
on doctor-patient relationship, 60
on dream analysis, 66
on emotions, 103
on hypnotism, 94
on importance of psychology, 21
influence of, 90
on inherent tendencies, 74
on indriya, 30
on love for God, 116
on meditation, 104-106, 113, 117,
118, 120, 151; see also
Meditation
on mental states, 131
on mind, 5, 9, 11, 15-17, 29, 61,
82, 97
on occult powers, 112, 146

236
INDEX
Hindu
psychologists—continued
on perception, 30
on philosophy, 110
on physical control, 83, 84
on reincarnation, 75
on relaxation, 108
on religion, 18, 19
on reorientation, 77
on repression, 58
on self-control, 49
on self-knowledge, 22
subjective methods of, 14
on suggestion, 92
on urges, 7, 8
on will, 86, 87, 102
on yoga, 13, 19, 186
psychology; see psychologists
religion, 77, 151
scriptures, 51, 182, 193
teachers, 61, 75, 84, 117, 127, 164,
174, 175, 180, 198, 202
thinkers, 75, 140, 178, 184
views, 116, 128, 208
Hinduism, 173
HOCKING, W. E., 15, 18, 98, 116, 206
HORNEY, KAREN, 64
Humanistic principle, 210
Humanists, 98, 151, 215
“Hunches,” 139, 140
HUNT, J. MCVICKER, 209
Hypnosis, 91, 93, 94
Hypnotic practices, 92
Hypnotism, 54, 61, 94, 95, 96
Ida (sensory nerve current), 84; see
Pingala
Ideals, 56, 60, 79, 82, 85-87, 94, 98,
99, 114, 117, 124, 129, 132,
177, 185, 194, 200, 212-215,
218, 220
Illusions, 148
Impersonal; see Absolute
Impressions, 23, 25, 29, 32, 55, 74-77,
136, 137, 194
Incarnations, 114, 115, 166, 181
Indian; see Hindu
Individuality, 96, 97
Indriya (internal instrument of
perception), 30-32
Infinite; See Absolute
Inhibitions, 66
Insight, 63, 65, 135-138, 140, 141
Instincts; see Urges
Intellect, 99, 117, 131, 154, 158, 176,
177
Intellectualists, 98
Introspection, 63
“Introvert,” 150
Intuition, 138, 140
Ishta (religious ideal), 110, 117, 163
Jagrat (awakened state), 12
JAMES, WILLIAM, 10, 12, 24, 28, 37,
104, 105, 107, 142, 143
JANÊT, 18, 54, 61, 93
Japam (repetition of the name of
God), 154, 182, 189, 194, 202
JESUS; see CHRIST, JESUS
Jewish mystics, 102, 116, 128, 146,
201
Jivan Muktas (liberated souls), 165
Jnana Yoga (path of rationalism), 174-
177, 186
JOHNSON, PAUL, 98
JONES, RUFUS M., 128
JUNG, CARL G., 5, 9, 16, 18, 64, 67, 68,
74, 75, 126, 130, 132, 166-168,
170, 200, 206, 207, 209, 211
KANT, 138
Karma Yoga (path of duty and unselfish
work), 55, 174, 182-187
KEITH, SIR ARTHUR, 119
KEMPIS, THOMAS À, 128, 173
Knowledge, 32-38, 43, 73, 92, 134,
135, 137, 138, 140, 144, 148,
151, 153, 156, 158-161, 164,
167, 168, 172, 176, 178, 181,
184, 188, 190, 191, 195, 204,
219
KÖHLER, WOLFGANG, 8
KRISHNA, 97, 99, 101, 131, 161, 165,
174, 175, 176, 181-186, 218,
219
Kriya Yoga (spiritual exercises), 155
LANGE, C. G., 37
LAO-TZE, 131
LAWRENCE, BROTHER, 156
Libido, 56, 92
LINCOLN, ABRAHAM, 96, 98, 99
Liquor, use and results, 57, 95
LODGE, OLIVER, 3

237
INDEX
Madhura (supreme relationship with
God), 180; see also Dasya,
Sakhya, Shanta, Vatsalya
Madonna, 114
Magnetism, 99, 101
MAIER, N. R. F., 23
Manas (indecisive faculty of mind),
29, 30
Mantra (name of God), 68, 118, 181
MARX, KARL, 215
Materialism, 131
Materialists, 1-3
Maya (relative existence), 178
MCDOUGALL, WILLIAM, 8, 10, 50,
65, 66, 80, 92, 143
Meditation
absolute, 132, 135, 137
criticism of, 126, 127, 150
deep, 18, 136, 181
discipline of, 85
effects of, 18, 111, 119, 129, 130,
133, 134, 136, 137, 164
eight steps to, 104, 105
instructions for, 122-125
and intuitive insight, 140
with Jnana Yoga, 177
with Karma Yoga, 185
with Mantra Shatra, 181
methods of, 11, 104, 105, 113,
147
need for, 131, 186
objects of, 111, 113-115, 117,
118, 120-124
power of, 103, 105, 108, 117, 175
practice of, 20, S64, 65, 71, 83,
84, 87, 102-105, 107, 109-111,
114, 120-122, 127, 128, 132-
135, 140, 141, 176, 177, 186,
192, 200, 202
right type of, 13
with social service, 129
utility of, 127, 131, 151, 200
Memory, 25-27, 74, 93
MENNINGER, KARL, 7, 69
Mental development, 109, 112, 118,
186, 187
Mental training, 65, 71, 104, 105, 132,
156, 159, 200
MESMER, 54
Mind, 1-6, 8-11, 13-36, 37, 46-48, 50,
52, 54-62, 64, 65, 67, 72, 74-76,
78-86, 88-91, 93-95, 97, 99,
102-123, 125, 126, 128-138,
140, 141, 148, 152, 154-160,
169-171,
Mind—continued 175-177, 179-182,
185-188, 192, 194, 199, 200,
206, 207;
see also Superconscious mind
MIRABAI, 131
Miracles, 142, 146
Mohammedan, 102, 153, 197, 198
Mohammedanism, 173
Mohammedans, 117
MÜLLER-FRIEINFELS, RICHARD, 3, 12, 143
MÜNSTERBERG, 10, 28
Mystery mongering, 143, 174
Mystic, mystical; see Religious
Mysticism, 99, 168
Mystics, 102, 116, 127, 128, 131, 134,
146, 152, 153, 155, 168, 170,
173, 175, 180, 194
NARADA, 180
Narcotics, use and results of, 57, 95,
106, 156
Near-mind, 15, 16, 18, 206
Nerve disorders, 42, 43, 47, 56, 58, 61,
62, 70, 71, 109, 130, 137, 209
Nerves, 6, 16, 48, 64, 83, 84, 148,
186, 187, 219, 221
Nervous system, 1, 2, 5, 12, 18, 21, 23,
24, 27, 29, 30, 32, 40, 41, 46-
48, 56, 57, 83, 89, 93, 94, 104,
106-109, 133, 143-145, 156,
176, 187, 199
Neurologists, 199, 200, 208
Neurosis, 6, 9, 13, 48, 56, 65, 69, 74,
89, 93, 199, 200 208
Neurotic, 42, 56, 58, 61, 62, 73
New Thought, 90, 91
Nirakara (formless), 116
Nirguna (attributeless), 116, 177
Niyama (physical and mental training),
105, 106, 175, 176
Occult powers, 107, 111, 112, 146,
147, 149, 153, 187, 190, 191;
see also Extrasensory perceptions
Om (Hindu symbol of the Supreme
being), 118
OTTO, RUDOLF, 168
“Over soul,” 119
Paramartha (spiritual goal), 217, 219,
220

238
INDEX
Parapsychology, 12
Patanjali, 5, 12, 13, 17, 18, 76, 104,
105, 107, 108, 110-112, 116,
118, 146-149, 152, 155, 162,
167, 174, 176, 191, 193, 195
Personalists, 116, 117
Personality, 17, 55, 78, 98-102, 103,
111, 112, 130, 148, 156, 160,
164, 165, 206
Phenomena, 4, 142, 146, 147, 149,
176
Philosophers, 33, 77, 82, 90, 177, 178
Philosophy, 60, 64, 77, 79, 90, 94, 99,
100, 116, 133, 134, 177, 200-
202, 205, 206, 208, 210, 212-
218, 222
Physicians, 45, 59, 132, 200, 216
Pingala; see Ida
Powers, 5, 7, 8, 13, 15, 20, 32, 48, 59,
82, 95, 99, 102, 103, 105, 107,
108, 111, 112, 115, 129, 130,
135, 140, 143, 146-149, 153,
179, 187, 190, 191, 196, 220
Pragmatism, 10
Pragmatists, 34
Prana (vital force), 84
Pranayama (breathing exercises), 105,
109;
see also Breathing exercises
PRATT, JOSEPH, 43-45, 132, 133
Pratyahara (withdrawal of mind), 105,
110, 187
Prayers, 150, 151, 154, 189
PREMANANDA, SWAMI, 100
Psyche, 166
Psychiatrists, 2, 8, 42, 47-49, 62-65,
69, 79, 91, 93, 103, 200, 203-
206, 208-210,
Psychiatry, 6, 203
Psychic control, 222
Psychic logos, 166
Psychical research, 2
Psychoanalysis, 4, 59, 61, 62, 64, 66,
71, 93, 103, 135
Psychoanalysts, 4, 7, 8, 18, 56, 58, 59,
61
Psychologists, 1-19, 23-25, 27-30, 32,
37, 42, 48-50, 54, 55, 58, 60,
61, 66, 74, 75, 77, 82-84, 86,
90, 91, 94, 98, 102-106, 108,
112, 113, 116-118, 120, 142,
146, 193, 194, 200, 203, 206-
208, 210
Psychology, 1, 10, 11, 13-15, 17, 18,
Psychology—continued 21, 22, 73, 94,
139, 142, 143, 146, 175, 192,
206-208, 212, 214
Psychosis, 6, 9, 13, 62, 72, 199, 200,
208
Psychotherapeutists, 47, 59, 65, 132,
200, 204, 205, 207, 208
Psychotherapy, 58, 59, 61, 63, 64, 94,
130, 203, 205-207
Purposivists, 10
Raja Yoga, 13, 104, 106, 107, 111,
155, 157, 174, 186, 187, 191
RAMAKRISHNA, SRI
on Absolute, 117, 120
attitude toward occult powers,
12, 112, 149
challenge of, 219
effect of life of, 101, 131, 165,
166
emphasized happiness on divine
plane, 218
emphasis on Japam, 182
on God, 176, 182, 196, 197, 202,
204, 221
mental changes of, 88
religious harmony, 97, 98, 117,
196, 197
superconscious experiences of,
159, 161, 162, 181
transmitted spiritual power, 195,
196
on urge for bliss, 52
Ramakrishna Order, 98, 100
Rationalists, 98, 168
Rationalistic thinkers, 119, 129
Reality; see Absolute and God
Reflexologists, 4
Reincarnation, 75, 76, 140
Relaxation, 108, 125, 132, 133
Religion
antagonism of, 217
appreciation of, 98
attitude of psychiatrists toward,
203, 209, 210
is basis for illumination, 19
contribution of, 199
exclusiveness in, 196-198
founders of, 203, 205, 218
goal of, 128, 150, 151, 184
Hindu, 77, 151
interpretation of 99, 206
knowledge of, 168

239
INDEX
Religion—continued
leaders in, 191
leads to God, 189, 197
is manifestation of divinity, 204,
205, 219, 222
principles of, 60, 134, 159
and psychology, 207, 208
realization in, 161,
rituals of, 172, 203, 204, 205, 222
begins with samadhi, 172
is search for underlying value, 101
teachings of, 79, 200
understanding of, 201, 205, 206
values of, 132, 159, 203
Religious
aspirants, 154, 175, 181, 185, 194
attitudes, 132, 196, 203
development, 107, 162, 163, 175,
176, 179, 189, 193, 194, 220
discipline, 64, 117, 173
evolution, 50, 51, 102, 112, 113,
117, 118, 175, 185, 201, 207
exercises; see practices
experiences; see realization
growth; see development
ideal, 132, 200, 213, 218, 220
initiation, 68, 122
instructions, 67
practices, 131, 149, 154, 162, 173,
175, 177, 184, 188-192, 196,
198, 200
realization
through analysis; see Jnana Yoga
based on ethics, 152, 175
criticism of, 150, 153, 156
critics of, 160
denied as valid, 217
in dreams, 67, 68
effects of, 99, 101, 153, 154,
156-162, 164-167, 169, 170,
192
not exclusive, 159, 172, 196-198
Freudian interpretation of, 69
intuition in, 138, 139
through love and devotion; see
Bhakti Yoga
through meditation; see Raja
Yoga
relation to extrasensory
perception, 144, 148, 149
repetition of the name of God in;
see Japam
Religious
realization—continued
requirements necessary for, 87,
122, 152, 154-156, 176, 192,
207
samadhi, 12, 18, 19, 36, 105, 154,
155, 157, 161-167, 170, 172,
187, 189, 196
same in East and West, 130, 131
through unselfish work; see Karma
Yoga
transmission of, 190, 191, 195,
196
unknown to humanists, 151
in various religions, 198
verification of, 53, 171, 172
visions in, 150-153, 157, 158,
162, 164, 166
Renaissance, the, 214
Repression, 48, 49, 51, 56, 58, 62, 64,
66, 69, 70, 72, 73, 155
RHINE, JOSEPH BANKS, 12, 143
Rhythmical breathing; see breathing
exercises
ROGERS, CARL R., 63, 65
ROLLAND, ROMAIN, 98, 195
Sadhana (spiritual discipline), 189
Saguna Brahman (personal God), 120
ST. ANTHONY, 131
ST. BERNARD, 128, 131, 173
ST. BONAVENTURE, 131
ST. DIONYSIUS, 131
ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI, 51, 87, 88,
98, 99, 129, 131, 152, 173
ST. IGNATIUS, 127, 128, 173
ST. JOHN OF THE CROSS, 128, 173
ST. PAUL, 171, 196, 201, 205, 218
ST. TERESA, 127, 128, 131, 155, 157,
158, 165, 167, 173
ST. THOMAS AQUINAS, 129, 155
Sakhya (friendship with God), 180;
see also Dasya, Madhura, Shanta, and
Vatsalya
Sakshi; see Absolute
Samadhi; see Religious realization
Samskaras (subconscious impressions);
see Impressions
SANKARACHARYA, SRI, 23, 117, 131, 152,
178
SANKHYA (system of thought), 18, 29
SARADANANDA, SWAMI, 88, 146, 153,
154, 162 180, 181

240
INDEX
Satchidananda (Absolute); see Absolute
Science, 99, 100, 127, 128, 166, 175,
213, 214, 217
Scientists, 2, 3, 34, 44, 45, 82, 137,
138, 142, 147, 159, 166, 171
SEAL, SIR B. N., 102
Self; see Absolute
Self-analysis, 60, 63-65, 103
Self-control, 49-51, 106
Self-hypnosis, 160
Sensations, 23-32, 106
Sense organs, 23, 27, 29, 30, 105, 143
Sense plane, 211-216
Senses, 25, 144, 145, 175, 211, 217
Shama (internal purification), 152,
175
Shanta (placid love for God), 180;
see also Dasya, Madhura, Saklya, and
Vatsalya
Shell shock, 72
Shisya (disciple); see Student
SHIVANANDA, SWAMI, 196
Shraddha (dynamic faith), 80, 81, 193
Siddhis (occult powers); see Occult
powers
“Social gospel,” 150
Social service, 126, 129, 152, 161
Society, 88, 92, 203, 212, 214, 215,
218, 219
Society for Psychical Research, 142
SOROKIN, PITIRIM, 214, 217, 218
Soul, 1, 30, 52, 75, 76, 97, 104, 119,
138
SPENCER, HERBERT, 138
SPINOZA, 8
Spiritual; see Religious
SPRANGER, EDUARD, 212, 213
Stigmata, 87, 88
STROMBERG, GUSTAF, 3, 138
Student, 41, 42, 60, 68, 92, 113, 117,
118, 149, 162, 175, 188, 191-
196
Subconscious; see Unconscious
Sublimation, 49, 56-58, 210
Substitution, 49, 210
Suggestion, 59, 61, 63, 71, 75, 88-96,
160
Superconscious, the, 8, 12, 16, 17, 153,
190, 207
Superconscious experiences, realization,
states, visions; see Religious
realization
Superconsciousness, 16, 105, 157, 166,
170
Superconscious state, 1, 9, 12, 18, 19,
36, 164, 167, 169, 173
Susupti (sleeping state), 12
Swapna (dreaming state) 12; See
Dreams
Technology, 214
Telepathy, 12, 142, 146, 153
Tendencies, 5, 7, 18, 49-51, 56, 58,
61-63, 74, 76, 94, 98, 107, 108,
111, 136, 137, 200, 208, 213,
214;
see also Urges
Theology, 100, 133
Thought transference, 75, 88, 94, 111,
145
Transference relationship, 59, 91, 92,
192
Transformation, 155, 201, 218
Triputi Veda (religious unity), 164
Truth, 73, 143, 160, 168, 174, 176,
179, 181, 186, 187, 194, 197,
213, 217
TULSIDAS, 131
Turiya (the Superconscious); see
Superconscious, the
Ultimate Reality; see Absolute
Unconscious, the, 8, 12, 16, 17, 19,
54-56, 74, 106, 124, 125, 135
Unconscious Mind, 4, 5, 17, 54, 55, 58,
62, 73, 74-76, 78, 89, 90
Unconsciousness, 16, 157
Unconscious state, 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 55, 74,
75, 166, 169
Urges, 7, 8, 37-40, 42, 43, 49-52, 58,
64-66, 69-73, 82, 92, 107, 108,
113, 138, 180, 185, 200, 211,
213, 220
Vatsalya (child-parent relationship with
God), 180;
see also Dasya, Madhurd, Sakhya, and
Shanta
Visions; see Religious realization
VIVEKANANDA, SWAMI, 55
on aspects of God, 117, 120
on character, 104
his effect on Indian culture, 153
lectures of, 90
life of, 101
on hypnotism, 94

241
INDEX
VIVEKANANDA, SWAMI—continued
on mental control, 155
on past impressions, 55, 74, 106
on personality, 101
on physical training, 107
prediction of, 215
on reform, 216, 217
on religion, 204, 205, 219, 222
on religious faith, 80, 81, 193
on religious paths, 184
on Samadhi, 167, 170
servant of humanity, 129, 153
on spiritual progress, 162
spiritual realizations of, 131
on steady practice, 195
on the superconscious state, 19
a teacher of yoga, 186
transmitted spiritual power, 196
on unconscious, conscious, and
superconscious, 157, 169, 170
VIVEKANANDA, SWAMI—continued
on yoga, 174, 185, 188
Volition, 36, 78, 102;
see also Will
WATSON, JOHN B., 9, 24
WESLEY, JOHN, 128
West, the, 14, 15, 21, 24, 29, 30, 54,
66, 77, 87, 98, 116
Will, 16, 61, 78-88, 94, 95, 97, 99,
101, 102, 104, 134, 140, 154,
173, 208
WOODRUFF, SIR JOHN, 182
Worship, 114, 118, 181, 185, 188,
189, 194
WUNDT, WILHELM, 1, 24
Yama (mental control), see Niyama
Yoga, yogas, 13, 155, 174, 175, 185-
189, 196-198;
see also Bhakti, Jnana, Karma, and
Raja Yoga
Yogi, yogis, 82, 97, 166, 185