# buddhist-psychotherapy-undv
# source PDF: raw/buddhist-psychotherapy-undv.pdf | pages: 288 | ~132141 words

Academic Papers presented at the 2nd IABU Conference
Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University, Main Campus
Wang Noi, Ayutthaya, Thailand
The International Association of
Buddhist Universities
(IABU)
Buddhist
Psychotherapy
(2)
(2)
The International Association of
Buddhist Universities
2012 IABU Editorial Committee:
Ven. Dr. Khammai Dhammasami
Prof. Padmasiri de Silva
Prof. Sarah Shaw
Dr. Dion Peoples
Jamie Cresswell

(3)
Preface
Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University (MCU) has been privileged to witness 
and play an instrumental role in developing and hosting successful UNDV and IABU 
celebrations, annually.  As always, we are all very grateful to the Royal Thai Government for 
its constant support, and thank the Thai Supreme Sangha Council for its blessings, guidance 
and support. We are indebted, also, to the United Nations for recognizing the thrice-sacred 
Buddhist holy day.
We had to delay the 2nd IABU Conference, due to the extreme ﬂ ooding that shut down 
MCU for nearly two months.  It has been 2600 years since the Enlightenment of our Great 
Teacher, and we have gathered here from across the globe, from many nations, to again 
pay tribute to his birth, enlightenment, and death – occurring on the same day in different 
years.  The 2nd IABU Conference is running this year, due to the postponement, with the 9th
United Nations Day of Vesak Conference.  The IABU Secretariat now plays a major role in 
our celebrations, particularly in the academic program of the conference.
This publication could not have been possible without the persistence, hard work, 
and dedication of MCU’s scholars and staff. I wish to thank all members of the International 
Council for The Day of Vesak and the Executive Council of the International Association of 
Buddhist Universities, and the other members of the Editorial Committee for their devotion. 
I am also grateful to our many donors, sponsors, and dedicated volunteers who return year 
after year to support the IABU and United Nations Day of Vesak Celebrations.
We all truly celebrate the Buddha’s Enlightenment, and hope these words reach 
the hearts and minds of the readers.  
The Most Ven. Prof. Dr. PhraDharmakosajarn
Rector, Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University
 President, ICDV & IABU

(4)
Contents
Preface
Table of Contents
Introduction
Buddhist Psychotherapy
1.  Ankaching Marma: Counseling and Its Importance: A Buddhist Perspective 3
2.  Dr. Sarath Chandrasekara: Buddhist Pre Marriage Counseling 19
3.  Petcharat Lovichakorntikul, John Walsh and Pacapol Anurit: Buddhist Social: 27
Work A Case Study of the Samrong General Hospital
4.  Ms. E.A.D. Anusha Edirisinghe, A.P . Gu nathilake: Role of Religion in 44 
the Rehabilitation of Off enders
5.  Prof. Sumanapala Galmangoda: An Analytical and Creative Study of  55
theBuddhist Theory and Practice of Psycho-therapy
6.  R. M. Rathnasiri: Cognitive, Behavioral and Psychotherapeutic Aspects as 62
Reﬂ  ected in Insight Meditation and Methods of Insight
7.  Dr. Wasantha Priyadarshana: Psychotherapeutic Value of Visuddhimagga for 73
the Enhancement of Modern Psychotherapy
8.  Khann Sareth and Tanja E Schunert; Taing S Hun, Lara Petri, Lucy Wilmann, 83
Vith Kimly, Judith Strasser, and Chor Sonary: Exploring the Utilization of 
Buddhist Practices in Counseling for Two Diff erent Groups of Service Providers 
(Monks and Psychologists) in Cambodia
9.  Judith Strasser, Dr. Sotheara Chhim and Sopheap Taing: Narrative Exposure  100
Therapy (NET): Culturally Sensitive Trauma Treatment for Khmer Rouge 
Survivors
10.  Dr. Upul Priyankara Lekamge: Countering Old Age Loneliness at  105
the Electronic Temple Through Dhamma Counseling
11.  Venerable Kirimetiyawe Dhammasiri Thera: The Utility of Buddhist  115
Psychotherapeutic Techniques for Liberation
12.  Ashin Sumanacara: A Psychological Analysis of Physical and 124 
Mental Pain in Buddhism
(5)
13.  Bhikkhu Nandisena: Mental Illness according to Theravada Buddhism  137
Towards a Theory of Mental Illness Based upon the Buddha´s Teachings
14.  Michael Franklin: Karuna-Ahimsa-and Relational Aesthetics:  145
Empathic Art Interventions for Contemplative Approaches to Psychotherapy
15.  Heather Marriott: Cultivating Wisdom and Compassion in Relationships: 155
Implications for Couples Therapy
16.  Dr. Dion Oliver Peoples: Images of Anger & the Ramiﬁ  cations of  175
Anger Management (with a focus on Domestic Violence)
17.  Maurits G.T. Kwee: Psychotherapy By Karma Transformation 193
18.  Professor Padmasiri de Silva: The Lost Art of Sadness: & the Meaning  213
of Love and Grief
19.  Deborah Bowman: Slang, Freud and Buddhist Psychology: Clarifying  227
the Term “Ego” in Popular, Psychodynamic and Spiritual Contexts
20.  Caroline Brazier: Other-Centered Approaches: Psychotherapy and  240
a Buddhist Paradigm Caroline
21.  Barbara Wright: A Buddhist Perspective on Trauma: Understanding,  253
Forgiveness, and Atonement
(6)
(6)
(7)
2nd IABU Conference: Introduction to 
the Buddhist Psychotherapy Volume
Welcome to the 2 nd International Association of Buddhist Universities Academic 
Conference on Buddhist Philosophy and Praxis.  This conference seems like it has been a long time in 
the making, due to the extensive ﬂ ooding that ravished Thailand, and certainly left Mahachulalongkorn
rajavidyalaya University, our gracious and great host, inundated with almost 2 meters of water. 
The university, where the IABU Secretariat is currently headquartered, has overcome this difﬁ cult 
situation, and we are now ready to hold this conference.  The conference was originally scheduled 
for 16-18 December 2011, but to make this happen seemed like an impossibility.  We are now here 
for the rescheduled date: 31 May – 02 June 2012.  We have noticed that our 2nd IABU Conference 
coincides with the 9th United Nations Day of Vesak Celebrations – but our aims are different for this 
occasion.  It’s quite fascinating that a single university can host two large international conferences at 
the same time.  We further give our humble respects to the Government of the Kingdom of Thailand 
and to the Thai Sangha Supreme Council for enabling this conference to proceed. 
When this conference was in its planning stages, we had initial discussions on the main 
theme: Buddhist Philosophy – but we did not want papers that just gave idealistic proposals.  Instead 
we aspired to gain papers that demonstrated philosophy in action, or the conversion of an idea into 
an actuality – and thus we wanted to implement or emphasize the aspect of praxis, into the conference.  
We had scheduled a practical meditation session, where elected Theravada, Mahayana and Vajrayana 
masters would hold a meditation session along with a question and answer period; but due to 
the merging of the two conferences: the 2ndIABU Conference and the 9th UNDV Conference – there 
was no longer enough allotted time for the meditation sessions, so it was regretfully eliminated.  
We hope that the gathering of academics took advantage of this expertise that availed themselves 
for this august gathering.  
As all the scholars can surmise, there are several formats or applications of Buddhism, some are 
living-systems, and some have become either extinct or have merged with existing systems.  Buddhist 
Philosophy is a vast topic that ﬁ lls many bookshelves.  Most of us have read texts on early-Indian 
or Vedic-philosophy and have seen the emergence into what we are discussing: Buddhism – but by 
no means are we holding a singular view of a Buddhism.  The overwhelming amount of scholars 
present here surmise that dependent-origination is probably the supreme-teaching of the Buddha, 
or the one doctrine that gathers the most attention.  The term: ‘praxis’ has caused some confusion 
amongst our scholars.  If the term was de ﬁ ned: we could determine that praxis is the application 
or process through which the philosophical or doctrinal point becomes actualized or put into place 
(practiced) – it’s about the endeavor.  We might have taken the term from international-socialistic 
literature, which emphasizes that besides just having philosophy – the point of all of us studying 
the Buddha’s preserved words is for the sake of improving our world – to eliminate suffering from 
the social experience.  How have we actually done this?    
Approximately 160 articles were received the 2nd IABU Conference from around the world.  
We have selected about 110 of them for presentation at the conference.  There are articles from 

(8)
different levels of scholars, ranging from the most senior of professors and on downward to 
undergraduates.  Each of the articles have merits of interest within them.  We decided on four 
programs (sub-themes).  This is the volume for the session on Buddhist Psychotherapy.
PANEL SUMMARY - BUDDHIST PSYCHOTHERAPY:
Papers were to focus on any of the following thematic sections: (1) Buddhism & therapeutic 
traditions: e.g. Cognitive and Behavior therapy, Psychodynamic therapy, existential therapy, 
emotion-focused therapy; (2) application of Buddhist therapeutic resources to issues in mental 
health: e.g. suicide, addictions, depression, grief counseling, death & dying, traumas and counseling 
for environmental disasters; (3) application & development of Buddhist positive Psychology for 
developing positive qualities: e.g. working with families, couple relations, Buddhist social work, 
emotional intelligence in professions; and (4) Buddhist world view & philosophy & its implications 
for therapy; studies collecting resources in the suttas for issues in counseling. Buddhist Psychotherapy 
has become a hot topic during this contemporary time.  Several conferences have sprouted since we 
announced our themes for this conference this year, most recently by the American Academy of 
Religion; moreover, with the postponement of our conference and the subsequent news announcement 
of the date-change, news of Buddhist Psychotherapy became more widespread, and it is likely that 
others have heard of our possible trailblazing activities, since the announcement was ﬁ rst spread on 
the web list-server, H-Buddhism.  With many of our scholars discussing themes on Facebook and 
other social media platforms, someone was bound to stand upon our ideas, and generate their own.  
We increasingly witness that we cannot adequately cope with the changing social-environment, 
and from our failures at adaptation, we begin to have mental problems, stemming from our 
mismanagement of circumstances.  We hope that these papers dearly address the dilemmas.  
AnkachinMarma’s paper on “Counseling and its Importance: A Buddhist Perspective” 
is a useful introduction to our panel, specially dealing with counseling learning and practice in 
the context of monastic education with reference to the techniques used by the Buddha.
SarathChandrasekera on “Buddhist Pre-marital Counseling” done with the help of case 
studies and also Buddhist traditional perspectives of the family is important, as today parents of 
children growing up in traditional Buddhist families also wish to supplement the advice of a monk 
with current resources in marriage counseling. The paper examines several theories about family 
structure and dynamics. The positive counseling model is based on the SigalovadaSutta. 
PetcharatLovichakorntikul’s paper jointly researched with John Walsh falls into the area of 
Human Resource Development focused on health care professionals. With the aim of developing 
the minds, attitudes and perceptions of healthcare professionals and invigorate Dhamma teachings 
and the resources in Buddhist ethics and meditation practice, it is a qualitative research study featuring 
face to face interviews at the Samrong Hospital. A very good model for Buddhist Social Work.
A.P. Goonathilake and AnushaEdirisinghe offer a useful study on the rehabilitation of 
offenders in the Bogamapara Prison in Kandy, Sri Lanka. Cases studies indicate that practice of 
meditation and the conduct of Buddhist religious activities do bring a change with a positive impact 
on their lives, though some of them are more focused on the reduction of the imprisonment period.
PANEL SUMMARY - BUDDHIST PSYCHOTHERAPY:
(9)
SumanapalaGalmangodapresents ”An Analytical and Creative Study of the Buddhist Theory 
and Practice of Psychotherapy”. He contends that concepts and practice of mental well-being, 
are necessarily connected to physical well-being, environmental and cultural factors. He presents 
a holistic concept of well-being drawing from his research from Buddhist canonical works. There is 
a focus on the conceptual framework of the mind, the interaction between mind and matter and 
the ﬁ ve aggregates and a kind of ‘conceptual clearing’ is an important stage in Buddhist psychotherapy.
R.M. Rathnasiri’s paper on, “Cognitive, Behavioral and Psychotherapeutic Aspects as 
Reﬂ ected in Insight Meditation & Methods of Insight” offers an interesting perspective for those 
who contend that Buddhist psychotherapy goes much deeper than modern psychotherapy and for 
them, this study offers the sevenfold purity expounded in insight meditation. The paper is well 
documented with Buddhist sources. The question remains in the light of this paper, to what extend 
can we construct “A liberation-Oriented psychotherapy”?
WasanthaPriyadarshana has been researching the “Psychotherapeutic Value of the Visud-
himagga” and he explores signi ﬁ cant therapeutic resources in terms of character types, the client 
and therapist relationship, the techniques of temporary suspension, overcoming by the opposite, 
by tranquilization, by escape and by destruction of de ﬁ lements. He also examines impediments to 
the therapeutic relationship.
Khan Sareth’s paper on “Buddhism and Psychotherapy”: He has worked with a group of 
therapists to create a curriculum for monks on Buddhism and Counseling as well as transfer a course 
on Buddhism and Counseling to Cambodian psychologists. As a result of the research project 
a M.A course on Buddhism and Psychology and a four day training program for monks were 
the tangible results of the project.
Judith Strasser and SouthearaChhim: “Narrative Exposure Therapy (NET)—Cultural 
Sensitive Trauma Treatment for Khmer Rouge Survivors” appears to be a landmark study of 
the counseling context for people who suffered the atrocities of the Khmer Rouge regime. 
The moving counseling tenet in this study that the integration of religious and cultural prac-
tices are not merely shock absorbers but offer positive meaning making and coping strategies for 
the Cambodia’s spirit-based culture.
K. Dhammasiri: Buddhist Psychotherapy Techniques and Its Utility for Liberation. This 
analysis is a textual study of canonical resources with special reference to the following suttas: 
Sallekha,Madupindika, Vatthupama, Vitakkasanthana and Sabbasava. As these techniques are mainly 
used to prevent the mind from unwholesome emotions, these sermons of the Buddha are relevant 
for both psychotherapy and liberation. Ethical purity, mental clarity and insight and wisdom are 
the Buddhist goals of liberation. 
AshinSumanacara: A Psychological Analysis of Physical and Mental Pain.  ABSTRACT 
not available
Michael Franklin: “Karuna and Ahimsa and Relational Aesthetics: The Use of Empathetic 
Art Interventions in Suffering” is the theme that Franklin develops, a theme that emerges out of 
a systematic awareness of human suffering and attuned communication of this empathetic awareness. 
The paper depicts how art is used to cultivate prajna and karuna within the therapist and therapist 
alliance. Franklin demonstrates how empathetic art interventions in the therapeutic context 
(10)
“Lay the tracks for practicing the spiritual dimensions of contemplative psychotherapy”. He provides 
new vistas for Buddhist contemplative psychotherapy.
BhikkhuNandisena presents a paper on, “Mental Illness According to the Theravada 
Tradition”. He makes a distinction between physical and mental illness and uses these distinctions 
for the diagnosis of mental disorders and treatment. He relates the existence of mental illness to 
what are described as the deﬁ lements of the mind and through Buddhist practice direct awareness of 
the state of the mind is possible. He illustrates his study with Buddhist canonical resources.
Heather Marriott presents the value of “Wisdom and Compassion in Relationships and 
their Implications for Couple Therapy”. She observes that according to current research it is seen 
that the practice of mindfulness and loving-kindness increases relationship skills. Couples who are 
mindful are more intimate, have more developed relationship skills and more satis ﬁ ed with their 
relationships. Self-compassion is also a valuable ingredient in a mature relationship. Heather cites 
valuable references from the current state of the art and presents her own case studies.
Dion Peoples: Images of Anger & Anger Management (with a focus on domestic violence).
(1) First there is a wide-ranging, thought provoking phenomenology of the anger temperament 
(dosacarita): anger in the soldier, anger and disorder in the streets, inside private homes, avenues 
of inhibited anger in children drowned and yet re ﬁ ned by music, in social networks, kids playing 
war games, in heated conversation, the body in anger—all the idiosyncrasies of a anger-torn culture: 
each context is important and not to be drowned by the blanket term, ‘anger’. (2) The meditative 
culture symbolized by the phrase: “Holding anger, like a mother holding the baby...because loving 
kindness is us, but anger is also us-- So one part of us is taking good care of another”. The paper 
gives a detailed breakdown of mindfulness of anger techniques. Through meditation we develop 
the energy of understanding rather than accumulate reactivity.
Maurits G.T. Kwee: His paper on “Psychotherapy by Karma Transformation” explores 
the therapeutic potential of the Buddhist concept of karma. Karma Transformation begins with 
a focus on an unwanted emotional state or deﬁ lement and works at changing unwholesome (akusala) 
perception, cognition and behavior. Greatly inﬂ uenced by cognitive behavior therapy, he blends CBT 
with karma transformation which is used for therapeutic changes, as well as preparing the mind by 
a shift towards the liberation ideal of emptiness and Buddhahood. The focus on intentional action 
and its karmic roots and results is an important contribution to Buddhist psychotherapy, as there is 
an understanding of the ‘immediate present’ movement as a focus for transformation, as important 
as the baggage that comes from the past.
Padmasiri de Silva’s paper on the “Lost Art of Sadness” is ﬁ rst a critique of the ‘medicalizing’ 
of human misery—locating states of intense sadness under the category of the clinical disorder of 
‘depression’ and as Freud said in his “Mourning and Melancholia”, sadness is not a morbid condition 
for medical treatment. The paper focuses on the reﬂ ective, positive, healing and dedicatory qualities 
of grief/mourning. Second point is the exploring of  Wolpert’s contention that ‘depression is a disorder 
of emotions’ and he uses the techniques of “Mindfulness-Based Emotion Focused Therapy” (EFT) 
to deal with negative emotions. Third, the paper brieﬂ y explores the subject of ‘collective sadness’ 
in panic cultures, using the novel “Guns and Roses”.
(11)
Caroline Brazier will speak on “Other-Centered Approaches: Psychotherapy &A Buddhist 
Paradigm”. This presentation will explore a other-centered paradigm in offering an alternative to 
the prevailing value systems found in Western psychotherapies, which often takes an individualistic 
turn. This approach views the self as dependently originated and constructed on the basis of object-
related perception. This approach is similar to the approaches in Naikan and Morita therapy in Japan. 
Brazier has developed this therapy at the Amida Center in the U.K. It is an approach that would 
enrich our panel on Buddhist psychotherapy.
Barbara Wright’s “The Triangulation of Vectors Where Time Stops: The Source of All 
Suffering”, develops what she calls the ‘Metta Map’ as a therapeutic device to treat victims of trauma. 
Two deﬁ nitions of trauma are given: the sudden and abrupt assault on individuals or organization; 
the neglected, prolonged assault with a cumulative and deleterious impact on individual, family, or 
organization.  The goal of therapy is to maintain awareness and presence to life challenging situations 
and falling into the abyss of a ﬁ xed negative orientation, which is often identiﬁ ed with the sense of 
one’s ‘self’. The Metta map is used as multi-dimensional tool drawing elements from the Dharma.
Concluding the Conference Collection of Articles:
In this large conference, we have discussed many facets of Buddhism.  From teaching 
Dhamma in places were Buddhism isn’t strongly established; to unifying the diverse Buddhist 
philosophical views; for Buddhist psychotherapy; and even Buddhist meditation and philosophy – 
many difﬁ cult ideas manifested.  It seems the conference was a success.  However, to be self-critical: 
did we miss the mark?  There are many dimensions to discuss in a session about psychotherapy, 
so i t’s a fair question to ask.  Did we succeed in discussing Buddhist Philosophy & Praxis?  Please 
take the time to read over all of these articles at your leisure and make these debate-pieces back at 
your institutions, make these pieces for conversations and for growth.  Build upon these ideas for 
future situations.  Are these pieces successful examples of real transformations?  Do they transfer 
well from mere theory to applicable situations?  We hope we have taken measures to improve your 
comprehension of Buddhism, through these multi-variety contributions.  We hope we have improved 
upon Buddhist scholarship.  Please enjoy the 2 nd IABU Academic Conference and various papers 
on Buddhist Philosophy & Praxis.
(12)
(12)
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy

3
Counseling and Its Importance: A Buddhist Perspective
Ankaching Marma1
Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University   
“It is not our psychological theory that cures the patient,
it is the numinous that is the real therapy.” 
- Carl Jung
Introduction:
Modern counseling psychology developed after the World War II when soldiers were highly 
affected with psychological injuries. The provision of counseling was recorded as critically needed 
at that time.2 Counseling has become important to the modern world when number of people suffer 
from anguishes at the increasing rate. People are facing more political, economic, environmental, and 
social problems due to the fast development of industrialization and globalization. These problems 
not only have tremendous impact on the physical and mental well-being of the people but also challenge 
the community of Buddhist monks as they also play a greater role to serving and healing people. 
As a social ﬁ gure and a spiritual leader, the monks are expected to take responsibility in delivering 
counseling service for the welfare of the society besides their spiritual practices. 
Buddhism emphasizes the importance of counseling to the people. It is the role of monks in 
the society as a spiritual instructor. ‘Counseling psychology’ integrated with Buddhist counseling 
would enhance the power of counseling and can be of another way to fulﬁ ll the social needs. “It’ s also 
a mistake to think that psychotherapy is only used to solve problems or end a crisis. Even a person 
is doing already well, therapy can be a way to promote personal growth.”3  Therefore, counseling is 
not only for people who have problems in life but it can be also applied to common people in order 
to improve their life with well-informed choices and problem-solving.
This paper examines the contemporary mental health issues to raise awareness, among the 
Buddhist monks and educators, on the importance of counseling and learning ‘counseling psychology’. 
The paper also summarizes the available Buddhist theories and methods of counseling and how they 
can be put into practice. Besides the canonical methods of counseling, some effective techniques 
like mindfulness-based therapy applied by modern psychotherapist, psychologist, and counselor 
are explored
1  Ankaching Marma studies in the International BA Program at MCU, from Bangladesh. I would like to express my 
heartfelt thanks to my teacher Dr. Dion Peoples for editing my paper with patience and also Venerable Aung Shing 
Marma and Dr. Montra Leoseng for their supports and comments. My especial thanks to Prof. Padmasiri de Silva for his 
helpful advice and generous gift of an insightful book on counseling, ‘ An Introduction to Mindfulness-based Counseling’. 
The book is indeed a recommend for academic interest and also counseling guide in our daily life.
2  McLeod, John, 2009, An Introduction to Counselling, Glasgow: Open University Press, p. 29-41.
3  Bloch. S., 2006,  Introduction to the Psychotherapies, 4th ed., New York: Oxford University Press, p. 542.
Introduction:
4
Conference
What is Counseling?
Firstly, let’s begin our discussion with a brief history of psychotherapy before explanation on 
the different deﬁ nitions of counseling; because counseling develops on the basis of psychotherapy. 
This little glance on the history of psychotherapy will give some insights on the models and theories 
of therapy.  Sigmund Freud is known to be the father of psychology. That’s why the credit goes to 
him for the development of psychotherapy with his introduction to psychoanalysis. He found out 
the etiology of mental disorder is the repressed thoughts and memories which he termed as unconscious. 
The conﬂ icted thoughts and memories are accessible through psychoanalysis by analyzing on dreams, 
fantasies and free association. 
Aaron T. Beck developed Cognitive Therapy leaving psychoanalytic theory with inﬂ uence 
of Albert’s Rational Emotive Behavioral Therapy during 1960-1963. It examines cognitive content 
of client and introspect reaction when the client is in disturbing situation. This needs a team work 
of therapist and client to identify; and change the negative, dysfunctional thoughts, emotions and 
behaviors.
Person Centered Therapy was brought out by American psychologist, Carl Rogers in 
1940s and 1950s. Some of mostly emphasized techniques of him are genuine warmth, accurate, 
nonjudgmental acceptance, and trust. He believes also that the clients have the capacity to heal by 
themselves when they know their problems.4 
The above paragraphs discuss on the brief history of development of psychotherapy as 
well the models and theories. Many diverse models and theories are being introduced in the ﬁ eld of 
counseling by the psychologists but converging to one goal of healing.
Secondly, a short discussion on the deﬁ nitions of the term ‘counseling’ would be helpful for 
us in understanding, ‘What is counseling.’ Counseling is, “the job or process of listening to someone 
and giving them advice about their problems (The Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary, 2008) 
while the Oxford Dictionary of English (2005) deﬁ nes it as, “the provision of professional assistance 
and guidance in resolving personal or psychological problems.”
There are many deﬁ nitions of the term ‘counseling’ by different experts of the ﬁ eld including 
offering advice and encouragement, sharing wisdom and skills, setting goals and resolving conﬂ ict, 
etc. Colin Feltham describes, “It may be considered quite obvious that counseling is a form of help 
for people who need it; that counseling usually involves two people discussing the problems or 
concerns that one of them has and the other is willing to listen.”5 Another deﬁ nition of the term:
Counseling denotes a professional relationship between a trained counselor and 
a client. This relationship is usually person-to-person, although it may sometimes 
involve more two people. It is designed to help clients to understand and clarify 
their views of their life space, and to learn to reach their self-determined goals 
through meaningful, well-informed choices and through the resolution of problems of 
an emotional or interpersonal nature.6
4  de Silva, Padmasiri, 2008,  An Introduction to Mindfulness-based Counseling, Sri Lanka: Sarvodaya Vishva Lekha, 
p.160-167.
5  Feltham, Colin, 1995, What is Counselling?, Trowbridge: Redwood Books, p. 5.
6  Burks, H.M. and Stef ﬂ re, B., 1979, Theories of Counseling, New York: McGraw-Hill, p. 14.
What is Counseling?
5
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Counseling is a process between a counselor and a client that focuses on enhancing 
the psychological well-being of a client. It takes place when the counselee seeks for counseling and 
the counselor, after a careful analysis, applies proper techniques in counseling process. Consequently, 
some positive outcomes can be achieved by any counselor though not all as Colin Feltham gives 
a list of ﬁ fteen beneﬁ ts that a counselor can offer to.7 
The Pali equivalent terms for counseling can be ‘ upadesa, anusāsana, mantanā, ovāda.’8
These terms give almost same meaning as ‘giving instruction or counseling.’ Although there are 
many explanations of the term ‘counseling’, but the aim of both - the secular and Buddhist counseling 
are to help people to overcome their problems. 
Counseling during Mental Crisis
The world has rapid with social, political, economic, and environmental crises. Therefore, 
mental illnesses; stress, depression, schizophrenia etc. are commonly observed and have a greater 
impact on livelihood of the people. Moreover, psychological factor is one of the causes for suicide 
besides social, biological, cultural, and environmental factors.
Depression and alcoholic disorders are major risks for suicide in North America and Europe.9
The Member Countries of the WHO (World Health Organization) South East Asian Region faces the 
worse situation from depression.10 According to the WHO, it is estimated the loss of 850000 lives 
every year due to depression. Only 30% cases worldwide, appropriate treatment is received despite 
the seriousness of depression. Depression was the 4 th leading contributor to the global burden of 
disease in 2000 and by 2020 it will be in the 2nd ranking of DALYs (Disability Adjusted Life Years) 
calculated for all ages, both sexes. 11 The world humanitarian day celebrated on August 16 th 2011 
by the WHO in Geneva, WHO Assistant Director-General for Polio, Emergencies and Country 
Collaboration, Dr. Bruce Aylward says, “In the last ﬁ ve years the psychological damage left in 
the wake of tsunamis, earthquakes, droughts and conﬂ icts has proven as devastating as the physical 
damage.”  From the above statement, it is clear fact that the physical damage can cause 
psychological damage and psychological damage also can cause physical damage as we are composed 
of interdependent psycho-physical components. 
 The more human civilization develops with materiality, the lesser interest of spirituality 
will increase. The prediction that mental sickness: depression will reach to 2 nd place of DALYs in 
2020 would be correct because the human civilization will be more developed in materiality rather 
than in spirituality. If the rate of depressed people accelerates then there is possibility of losing of 
many valuable human lives in suicide increasingly. Emile Durkheim argued that religion could do 
7  McLeod, John, 2009, An Introduction to Counselling, Glasgow: Open University Press Open University Press, p. 16-17. 
He listed number of aims of counseling which is possible by any counselor to achieve and this is the list of ﬁ fteen 
aims; (1) insight,(2) relating with others, (3) self-awareness, (4) self-acceptance, (5) self-actualization, (6) enlightenment, 
(7) problem-solving, (8) psychological education, (9) acquisition of social skills, (10) cognitive change, (11) behavior 
change, (12) systematic change, (13) empowerment, (14) restitution, and (15) generativity and social action.
8  Rhys Davids, T.W., & William Stede, 2004, The Pali-English Dictionary, New Delhi: Asia Educational Service. 
9  http://www.who.int/mental_health/prevention/suicide/suicideprevent/en/  - accessed on 20 Aug 2011.
10  http://www.searo.who.int/en/section1174/section1199/section1567_6741.htm  - accessed on 19 Aug 2011.
11  http://www.who.int/mental_health/management/depression/de ﬁ nition/en/index.html  - accessed on 19 Aug 2011.
Counseling during Mental Crisis
6
Conference
preventive actions on suicide by the strong social and moral ties to a religious community.12That can 
be one solution yet there is another effective alternative; bond to spirituality.
Emile Durkheim’s argument on the bond of religion for suicide prevention brings questions 
to non-religious people or atheists: where and to whom they would go? How can they be prevented 
from suicide? In response to these questions, people can be spiritual rather than religious. To be 
spiritual, it is not necessary to be religious. In fact, spirituality is the basic foundation and element 
of all religions. It is born in the mind since we are born. It is within us always. The famous English 
phrase “I’m spiritual but not religious.” means not belonging to any particular religious institution or 
belief. A beach will do.13 It can be developed through mindfulness meditation to connect oneself to 
the spirit; spirit of being non-self. Spirituality is without discrimination so as mindfulness meditation. 
To support this argument, I would like to quote what David Tacey says in his paper ‘Spirituality and 
the Prevention of Suicide’, “We reach for the spirit, the not-self, only to ﬁ nd that it lies at the very 
core of the self. Buddhism grasps this paradox well, which is why it is so popular.”14  
There is then a hope for a healthy society if people are encouraged to be bond to religions 
or spirituality. Also, they have to be aware of being slave to materiality and educated on the danger 
of growing rate of depression in the world.
Buddha & Counselor’s Qualities
There are many interesting stories in the biography of the Buddha from which some methods 
of counseling can be learned. He, having the noble qualities of a counselor, also prescribed some 
qualities that should be possessed by a good counselor. 
1. Buddha as a Counselor
We should not forget to mention about the founder; the lord Buddha, discussing on the Buddhist 
counseling. He was not only a religious teacher, but also a great psychotherapist and counselor. He 
had consoled many individuals from every walk of life - normal and abnormal persons. He was 
therefore known as the Anuttara Purisadammas ārathi15 (the incomparable charioteer of taming 
beings) which is one of the nine qualities of the Buddha. Furthermore, his unique characteristic of 
taming human and non-human is read in the Jayamangala atthagatha and some other discourses. 
The healing of the Buddha to Kisagotami16 is one of the qualities that show his greatness as 
a counselor. The scenario of her shows vividly that she was totally mad. The cause of her neurosis 
12  Durkheim, Émile, 2005, Suicide: A Study in Sociology, London and New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 
p. 342-343, accessed on 10 Sept 2011, (See PDF http://swauop.yolasite.com/resources/Durkheim%20-%20suicide.pdf )
13  Blake, John, 03 June 2010, Are there dangers being ‘spiritual but not religious’?,  CNN Living, accessed on 22 
Sept 2011, http://articles.cnn.com/2010-06-03/living/spiritual.but.not.religious_1_spiritual-community-religious-god?_
s=PM:LIVING 
14  Tacy, David, June, 2003, Spirituality and the Prevention of Suicide, ABC News, accessed on 20 Aug 2011,  
http://www.abc.net.au/religion/stories/s972766.htm  
15  Rhys Davids, T.W., & William Stede, 2004, The Pali-English Dictionary , New Delhi: Asia Educational Service. 
It translates the term ‘Purisadammasārathi’ as ‘guide of men who have to be restrained.’
16  Burlingame, Eugene Watson, 2005, tr. Buddhist Legends, Part II, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited, 
p. 257-260.
Buddha & Counselor’s Qualities
7
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
is the death of her only dearest child. She ran from physician to physician, and spiritual teacher to 
spiritual teacher; just for waking up her child. None of them could console her despite surplus more 
pain and sorrow telling ‘your baby is dead’. She, eventually, came to the place where the Buddha 
was and asked for his help. He was unlike to them, gave an assignment to bring master-seed from 
a house in which nobody had died. He gave a word of promise that if she could bring, he would cure 
her child. But there was no house wherein no one had died. Every house where she asked response 
either grandmother, father, brother or son died a few days back. These responses illuminated her to 
understand about impermanence of life; death is inevitable.  
This technique of the Buddha highlights the importance of analysis and understanding of 
a counselee’s condition. He did not directly respond her that her child was dead. If he did, she might 
not accept it. He knew that advising or teaching her right the way would not be an effective way. 
Instead, he tried to calm down her powerful deﬁ lement of grief and sorrow by giving an assignment. 
Another salient example of his great quality of taming is the drunken and the furious elephant, 
Nalagiri.17 The drunken elephant lost its sense and rushed towards the Buddha furiously to attack 
him. Everyone was shouting and crying, but the Buddha was silent and compassionately looking at 
it. Nonetheless, it came furiously rushing at him; he tamed it by the noble weapon of empathy and 
compassion upon it. HSS Nissanka, a Sri Lankan psychotherapist has researched and experimented 
on these virtues. 
On seeing the suffering that is there in the patient, ‘Karuna’ sympathy and concern 
will be generated in the heart of the therapist and the radiation of it will be noticed by 
the patient. Seeing the suffering of the patient thus will bring about a transformation 
in the hearts of the patient and the therapist and that will prevent even transference.18
Furthermore, there are a number of western psychotherapists, like Rogers who has explored 
and experimented empathy in psychotherapy. He discovered a similar meaning to Buddhist empathy 
that “ …the most effective approach was to listen for the feelings, the emotions whose patterns could 
be discerned through the client’ s words...the best response was to “reﬂ ect” these feelings back to 
the client.”19
2. Counselor’s Qualities
Both Buddhist and Carl Rogers share striking similarities on the qualities and personalities of 
the counselor with some slight differences. The major similar qualities of genuineness, non-judgmental 
acceptance, and empathy are proposed by both schools.  Some qualities of a good counselor are read 
in early Buddhist scriptures, like Udayi-sutta of the Anguttara-nikaya.20 This Sutta demonstrates 
ﬁ ve effective qualities of a good counselor.  
17  Op. Cit. Part I, p. 236.
18  Nissanka, HSS, 2009, Buddhist Psychotherapy, Dehiwala: Buddhist Cultural Centre, p. 60.
19  Rogers, C.R., 1975,  Empathic: An Unappreciated Way of Being, California,  accessed on 10 Sept 2011, (See also PDF 
http://www.sageofasheville.com/pub_downloads/EMPATHIC_AN_UNAPPRECIATED_WAY_OF_BEING.pdf
20  Hare, E.M. tr., 1995, The Book of the Gradual Sayings, V ol. III, Oxford: Pali Text Society, p. 135-136. The Pali terms 
are taken from http://tutor.ksana.tw/cgi-bin/accelon3.cgi/ksana?db=tipitaka.adb, with Pali commentary  
http://tipitaka.org/romn/  - accessed on 11 Aug 2011.
8
Conference
Gradual talk (Anupubbikatham): A counselor  possesses the quality of presenting the dharma 
in a gradual way according to the level of the deﬁ lement in the patience like from talk of giving to 
morality then to four noble truths.
1. Talk on sequence ( Pariyāyadassāvī kathaṃ): A counselor should have the quality of 
giving the dharma in whatever is good and showing the cause. 
2. Compassionate talk ( Anuddayataṃ pa ṭicca katha ṃ): A counselor should cultivate 
compassion towards the counselee and treat him/her with the sense of helping. 
3. Talk without material expectation ( Na āmisantaro kathaṃ): A counselor should help 
the client with compassion without expectation of material gains.
4. Non-judgment ( Attānañcaparañca anupahacca katham ): A counselor should not 
compare himself/herself with others and praise himself/herself. 
In contrast to the exposition of Carl Rogers on the personality of the counselor, he proposes 
six conditions that should be adopted by the counselor. He found that these conditions are necessary 
to be implemented and sufﬁ cient for the process. The below is list of conditions.21
1. Relationship of client and counselor: The most important condition has to establish, 
initially, psychological contact between the client and the counselor.
2. Client’s incongruence: The state of incongruence of the client is vulnerable to anxiety 
which helps to develop relationship.
3. Genuineness of counselor: The counselor should be honest and genuine with his/her 
experience, deeply and freely involved himself/herself in order to promote relationship.
4. Unconditional positive regard: The counselor should adopt non-judgmental acceptance 
towards the client; without judging what the client says or does, is good or bad, etc.
5. Accurate empathy: It is understanding and awareness of the counselor whenever 
the client is experiencing any moods or feelings.
6. Client’s perception: The client’s perception on the unconditional positive regard and 
accurate empathy of the counselor. 
The personalities of genuineness, non-judgmental acceptance, and empathy are very common 
to both Buddhist and Carl Rogers. Buddhist gradual talk and sequential talk can be compared to Carl 
Rogers’s genuineness where the counselor expresses the genuine experience to the client. The talks 
on four noble truths and cause and effect of Buddhism are the genuine expressions on the real nature 
of the world. The experience of suffering is exposed and the way of overcoming from it by the pragmatic 
method of cause and effect action-based is taught by the counselor. 
The personality of non-judgment is also prescribed for the counselor in both schools. 
The counselor should not judge the client whether he/she is good or bad and compare himself/herself 
or other clients. Because the counselor’s expression of judgment and comparison can be sensed by 
21  Rogers, C, The Necessary and Sufﬁ cient Conditions of the Therapeutic Personality Change, American Psychological 
Association, 1992, Accessed on 25 Sept 2011,http://person-centred.co.uk/pdf%20props/necessary%20and%20sufﬁ cient.pdf
9
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
the client and the process of therapy possibly would fail. Instead the warm and non-judgmental 
acceptance of the counselor is encouraged regardless of the client’s personality. 
The quality of empathy can be compared to Buddhist compassion where the radiation of 
compassion is perceived by the client. It is the empathic understanding of the client’s conditions 
and taking the clients’ problems as his/her own problems but without attaching to it. It is just like 
the simile of a dustbin without bottom where the rubbish slip out from the bottom likewise 
the counselor should act like this; accepting the rubbish but without keeping them.22
There are also some differences in the adaptation of the necessary conditions in two 
schools. The client’s incongruence and perception is not mentioned in the Buddhist personalities of 
the counselor. The Buddhist personalities of the counselor are more focused on the counselor side 
over the client. But it does not mean that Buddhist counselor is not aware and concerned for the client. 
Another difference is the material un-expectation in Buddhist counseling because the Buddhist 
monks are not supposed to be professional careers. 
The personalities of genuineness, non-judgmental acceptance, and empathy are key roles of 
a counselor. Both schools strongly accept these conditions are necessary in the counseling theories 
because they are reﬂ ected by the counselee during the therapy process. The reﬂ ections of these by 
the counselee are important to build trust and conﬁ dence in the counselor. 
Counseling through Mindfulness
The practice and study of mindfulness meditation is expanded beyond that it has intervened 
as a treatment in the mainstream medicine. It is being studied in universities and colleges and used in 
hospitals and prisons. Modern scientists have discovered the power of mental culture and mindfulness 
in the art of living a worry-free life and healthy life. The mindfulness-based therapy has being used 
to treat patients and shown some positive results.
According to Roga-sutta, it is difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd one person who is healthy in physically and 
much more difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd one who is healthy in mentally for even one moment, “Monks, there are 
to be seen being who can admit freedom from suffering for one year...hundred years. But, monks, 
those beings are hard to ﬁ nd in the world who can admit freedom from mental illness even for 
a moment.” 23 Indeed it is true. How many of us in the world are freed from worries, tension, 
obsession, etc.? We worry, in every second, minute, and day, of past what has already gone, present 
what is happening and future what is still to come. Are we healthy in mentally? In the words of 
Padmasiri de Silva, “In one sense everyone is subject to ‘mental disease’, except the arhants who 
have destroyed the āsavas.”24 The mind is a forerunner of thoughts and actions25 which are basically 
motivated by craving (tanha) of wholesome, and unwholesome; sexual driven (rāga), angry driven 
(dosa), and deluded driven (moha).26 It is often dominated by deﬁ lements (āsava) and hide individual 
22  Brahm, Ajahn, 2008, Opening the Door of Your Heart, Australia: Hachette, p. 97.
23 Woodward, E.L., 1995, tr. The Book of Gradual Sayings, V ol. II, Oxford: Pali Text Society, p. 146.
24  de Silva, Padmasiri, 2005, An Introduction to Buddhist Psychology, London: Palgrave Macmillan, p. 123. 
25  Sri Dhammananda, K, tr., 1992, The Dhammapada, Kuala Lumpur: Sasana Abhivurdha Wardhana Society, p.41.
26 de Silva, Padmal, 2010, ‘Buddhist Psychology: Exploring Practical And Theoretical Aspects’, New Horizons in Buddhist 
Psychology, Kwee, Maurits G.T. ed., Ohio: Taos Institute Publications, p. 96.
Counseling through Mindfulness
10
Conference
from knowing and seeing the real nature of the mind. Though everyone is subject to mental disease 
but the mental disease would become worse if it is not taken care. Therefore, Mahasatipatthana-
sutta offers four foundations of mindfulness as a therapy for mental illness and also for complete 
psychological liberation, Nibbana.
There is, monks, this one way to the puri ﬁ cation of beings, for the overcoming of 
sorrow and distress, for the disappearance of pain and sadness, for the gaining of 
the right path, for the realization of Nibbana- that is to say the four foundations of 
mindfulness.27
Buddhist psychotherapy and counseling have been practicing in East and West. Many 
experiments have been already carried out, by the modern psychologists on the effectiveness of 
mindfulness meditation.28 HSS Nissanka, in his book ‘Buddhist Psychotherapy’, proves ten successful 
case studies using Buddhist techniques of counseling and therapy. Some of the patients where they 
could not be cured by Western psychotherapy were cured by Buddhist psychotherapy under him. 
The Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) was developed by Kabat Zin based on Buddhist 
philosophy of meditation in 1979. It offers healing to variety of disorders and diseases of participants 
by developing awareness of body and mind. He deﬁ nes mindfulness in MBSR as a moment-moment 
non-judgmental awareness by paying attention 29. Subsequently, the Mindfulness-Based Cognitive 
Therapy (MBCT)30 program was founded by Zindel Segal, Mark Williams, and John Teasdale based 
on Kabat Zin’s MBSR31 program which integrates with cognitive therapy and mindfulness. It aims 
clients accepting the problems without judgment and making friendship with them instead of rejecting 
and pushing them away. The client in this program is taught to do mindfulness meditation and to be 
in the present moment, watching what is happening and accepting the feelings and emotions rather 
than suppressing them. Recently mindfulness-based therapy is also being intervened to other types 
of diseases like HIV , cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, chronic lower back pain, and hot ﬂ ash.
Depression is one of the most world burdens of disease. Worse thing can be happened to 
depressed person is suicide. There are various types of treatment introduced for the treatment of 
depression like antidepressant drugs and psychotherapy. One of the most often use treatment is 
antidepressant drug where the patients are given to take drugs. All though many patients are cured 
by those treatments but still many are vulnerable to depression after few weeks of recovery. Studies 
found out that 50% of patients will have depression episode, subsequently, after initial treatment of 
depression episode and 70-80% of patients is likely to have relapse in their lifetime. The interventions 
are not very effective in the sense that they are not effective to fully recovery. The risk of relapse 
is very high. In response to the relapse of depression, modern psychologists have intervened 
mindfulness-based therapy to do prevention from relapse. It is found in the research that it is 
an effective technique to reduce the risk of relapse in depression.32
27  Walse, Maurice, tr., 1995, The Long Discourses of the Buddha, Boston: Wisdom Publication, p. 335.
28  http://www.mindandlife.org/about/mission/ - accessed on 12 Sept 2011.
29  Kabat Zin, Mindfulness Stress Reduction and Healing, 8 March 2007, Online video clip, YouTube,  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rSU8ftmmhmw – accessed on 14 Dec 2011.
30  http://www.mbct.com/ - accessed on 11 Aug 2011.
31  http://www.mindfullivingprograms.com/whatMBSR.php - accessed on 11 Aug 2011. 
32  Segal, Zindel V ., J. Mark G. Williams, John D. Teasdale, 2002,  Mindfulness-based Cognitive Therapy for Depression,  
New York: The Guilford Press, p. Google Book Search, accessed on 29 Sept 2011
11
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Stress is common to everyone in everyday life. It becomes big issue only when it is ignored. 
As Padmasiri de Silva said, “It is rather the way we respond or react to them.”33 It depends on how 
one response to it. If one mismanages it carelessly then it can be damage to one’s mind and body.  
It is manageable when one pays attention and mindful of the stressful situation. Even sharing stress 
problems with friend, counselor, or monk is also a good technique. Padmasiri de Silva also has 
given some cases studies and concluded “Cohesive and lively family relations and good friends are 
great resources for living in a society undergoing rapid changes. There is empirical and experiential 
evidence that the patient and less deliberately modes of mind like mindfulness practice are effective 
when dealing with stress, disorder, chaos and uncertainty.”34
Mindfulness-based therapy is also intervened to cancer patients. Some studies have found 
that psychological disorder like depression can be caused of cancer. It is also proved that patients 
with high depression die sooner than less depression. Though cancer is physical illness but due 
to psychological factors it can worsen the conditions of the cancer. Therefore, mindfulness-based 
therapy is offered to cancer patients with mainstream treatment as productive union. The below 
quote is “How can mindfulness help you to cope with cancer?” and how it is beneﬁ cial for the client. 
We don’t offer you mindfulness as a cure for yours disease. Rather, it holds 
the possibility of vastly enriching your life, helping you cope with symptoms and 
side effects, and improving the quality of your days. Mindfulness also enhances 
your immune system’ s performance and help harmful levels of stress hormone in 
your body, changes can be only beneﬁ cial.35
A study on the HIV patients shows some effectiveness of intervention of mindfulness-based 
therapy. Besides, the attack of HIV to CD4 T cells of immune system, there is also another attack 
from psychological disorder like stress and depression that leads to loss of CD4 T cells. Creswell 
and his colleagues have examined a group of HIV positive patients for eight weeks by intervening 
MBSR (Mindfulness-based Stress Reduction) and found out that CD4 T cells are not attacked to 
declination by HIV . In contrast, the control group of patient lose their CD4 T cells.36 
Above all, my own experience would be more accurate for my deeper understanding on 
the mindfulness meditation. I have been suffering from lumbago since ﬁ fteen and never went to see 
medical doctor except traditional doctors. A few days of treatment were given; massage on painful area 
of my lower back.  It was painful to twist the body left and right, bending forward and backward etc. 
During the ten days course of meditation held by our university annually from 18th to 28th December 
2012, I have experienced an effective response from the meditation retreat; reduction of pain on my 
lower back. Mindfulness was placed on rising and falling of my abdomen. As my stomach pushed 
forward and backward, it massaged the painful area of my back diagonal to front abdomen. After 
several times of mindfulness practice, my body could be bended and twisted without pain.
The technique of mindfulness meditation would be the most effective though there might 
be other techniques. It is because mindfulness meditation or mental culture purely deals with 
33  de Silva, Padmasiri, Op. Cit,  p.18.
34  Ibid, p.25
35  Carlson, Linda, Speca, Michael, 2010, Mindfulness-based Cancer Recovery, Oakland: New Harbinger Publications, 
p. 3, Google Book Search, Accessed on 30 Oct 2011.
36 Wheeler, Mark, Practice of Mindfulness Meditation Slows the Progression of HIV , Study Shows, 24 July 2008,  
http://newsroom.ucla.edu/portal/ucla/mindfulness-meditation-slows-progression-53819.aspx – accessed on 29 Sept 2011.
12
Conference
the mind. And it is the mind which is the root of all the mental illnesses though causes can be 
inﬂ uence by outside factors. So mental illness should be treated with mental treatment rather than 
psycho-surgery, chemotherapy, or electroconvulsive therapy. More importantly, counseling through 
mindfulness emphasizes on the self-healing by the individual counselee himself/herself. It is true 
according to the words of Jung who said that it is individual numinous that cure the patient. 
Ultimately, it is individual’s effort and spirit who cures himself/herself through a kind of self-healing. 
The ancient practice of mindfulness is coping with the modern world and importantly 
its blend to modern sciences. The expansion of mindfulness meditation to other ﬁ eld of sciences 
would enrich the studies and experiments of those sciences and also study of mindfulness meditation. 
Scientists and researchers should be encouraged to continue their experimentations with the mindfulness 
meditation so that it can be applied as a useful tool in human society.
Counseling through Instruction
When talking about the techniques of Buddhist psychotherapy or counseling, people 
usually think of mindfulness techniques only. There are other techniques of counseling found in 
Buddhism like counseling through instruction which can be brought into play to modern 
psychotherapy and counseling like mindfulness meditation is being blended. The methods of counseling 
through instruction are instructions; guidelines, advice, suggestions, etc. that are counseled to 
the clients. The followings are the different methods of counseling through instruction that are found 
in various occasions of the Buddhist scriptures.
Progressive talk (Anupubbikathā): - This technique is given to the counselee who is with 
powerful deﬁ lements in order to calm down them. Level of intelligence and deﬁ lements determine 
type of a person. A person, with low intelligence and more deﬁ lement, needs to go in gradual process 
so that he/she could grasp the conversation. In the procedure of gradual talk, the counselor could 
talk about generosity, compassion, eight worldly conditions, morality, etc. According to David J. 
Kalupahana, by this method of instruction, the counselee can lead towards to psychological balance, 
“This is often achieved by indicating the possibility of attaining freedom and happiness through 
gradual path of mental culture toward psychological balance that begins with the cultivation of 
simple virtues such as sympathy, generosity, charity, etc.”37
The story of Suppabuddha 38, the leper, is a good example of this technique of gradual 
instruction. The Buddha used this method to teach him because he was suitable with this progressive 
talk. He could catch what is giving and its good effects, moral conduct and its beneﬁ ts, etc.
The talk special to the Buddhas ( Sāmukkaŋsikā): -  Gradual talk is the preparedness of 
the mind of the counselee. After the gradual talk, the counselee is given this method of instruction.
At this level, the counselor can talk on four noble truths. It can be instructed in a very practical way. 
Here, the counselor can counsel on the illness of the counselee, causes of mental disorder/illness, 
cure of illness, and way of curing illness. Thus, when the counselee knows about his/her illness and 
way to solve it, it gives hope of recovery in her/him. 
37  Kalupahana, David. J., 2010, ‘ Miracles: An Early Buddhist View’, New Horizons in Buddhist Psychology, Kwee, 
Maurits G.T. ed., Ohio: Taos Institute Publications, p. 178.
38  Ireland, Jonh D. tr., 1997, The Udāna and Ittivuttaka, Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society, p. 66.
Counseling through Instruction
13
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
HSS Nissanka, in his counseling of cases, uses the technique on talking impermanence. He 
convinces the patient that his/her illness is also impermanence as everything is impermanence. It is 
not permanent which means his/her illness can be recovered.39 
Through the dialogue of question and answer: - This is a friendly dialogue between these 
two: counselor and counselee. The counselor puts questions in order to diagnose the cause of 
counselee’s problem and to distinguish the type of the individuals. Basically, there are three types of 
individuals: greedy type (lobha), violent type (dosa), and sexual driven type (moha). The counselor, 
after understanding the problems of the counselee, employs appropriate treatment and advice to deal 
with it. On the other hand, the counselee is also freed to ask concerning her/his problem. In this way, 
communication between counselor and counselee is developed.
Through audio and visual aids: - This method can be used as an alternative approach in 
counseling. At the age of IT (Information Technology), the counselor gives some audios or video 
tapes such as paritta chanting, lessons and instructions to be exercised at home. The recent study, 
on the effects of the body and mind by listening to Paritta40 chanting, shows some positive results.  
As Chandana Jayaratne observes in his survey that listening to Paritta chanting beneﬁ ts the listener 
with a calm mind, slow  heartbeat, increase of the body’s immune system and IQ level, learning 
ability and problem-solving capability,  relief of insomnia, sustained positive thoughts, cultivation 
of compassion and production of happiness, etc.41 
There are many stories of the Buddha’s counseling by using the method of audio and 
visual aids like showing the deformed monkey and celestial nymphs to Nanda 42 and the monk 
Cullapanthaka,43 who could not memorize even one verse in four months, a dull person. He was 
frustrated and decided to leave the monkhood life. Eventually, he was awakened from boredom 
while rubbing the piece of white cloth which was given by the Buddha. Boredom is an emotional 
state experienced when individual is lack of interest in and dif ﬁ culty concentrating on the current 
activity.44 Padmasiri de Silva proposed the way out of boredom “ Thus clarity of understanding, 
transparency, self-knowledge and wisdom present the way out of boredom and misery.”45  
The talks on talk on the four noble truths related with the concept of impermanence have 
to adopt by the counselor so that hope of recovery will arise in the mind of the counselee. And 
the gradual talk which talks on morality and generosity can further be guided the counselee for 
an ethical life even after recovery.
39  Nissanka, HSS, Op.Cit. p. 55-56.
40  Paritta suttas are set of discourse of protection delivered by Buddha for the monks and laypeople to be recited orally 
when they are in fear, danger, ill etc. as means of protection and build of conﬁ dence. The Gilana sutta proves that the Buddha 
himself have listened to Paritta by a monk to cure from an illness.
41  Dr. Jayaratne, Chandana, 2010, ‘Buddhist Pirit Chants for Mental and physical Well Being- A Scientiﬁ c Approach’, Global 
Recovery: The Buddhist Perspective, Conference V olume, Dion Peoples, ed., Ayutthaya: Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya 
University, p. 550.
42  Ibid, p. 217-225.
43 Burlingame, Eugene Watson, tr., 2005, Buddhist Legends Part II, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited, 
p. 299-310.
44  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boredom#cite_note-3 – accessed on 11 Sept 2011.
45  de Silva, Padmasiri, 2010, ‘The Joyless Economy: The Pathology of a Culture which calls for an Awakening’, Global Re-
covery: The Buddhist Perspective, Conference V olume, Peoples, Dion, ed., Ayutthaya: Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya 
University, p. 572-573.
14
Conference
Role of Monk as Counselor
The monks play a very important role as counselor in the society. The lay society has greater 
expectation from the community of monks to serve the society as laity serves them. Their guidance 
and contribution on the path of spirituality would have a greater impact in the society. In this respect, 
their contribution will not be ef ﬁ cient unless they have a clear understanding of the secular world 
and the current world. Therefore they need to be educated in Buddhism integration with worldly 
subjects like counseling psychology. 
It is also common understanding that in Buddhist society, monks are considered as spiritual 
teachers and instructor of the society. The laity when they are in trouble, they also approach to the 
monks. They seek console and advice thinking that they can help them. So the monks have to deal 
and cope with problems of the laity. Ajahn Brahm, shares his experience the role of a monk as 
a counselor, “Monks and senior monks especially, have to sit in their monastery, listen to people’ s 
problems and accept all their rubbish. Marital problems, dif ﬁ culties with teenage children, rows 
with relations, ﬁ nancial problems- we hear the lot.” 46 It is difﬁ cult for them dealing with secular 
problems such as marital problem, relationship problem, etc. Sometimes they fail to give appropriate 
instruction to laity’s satisfaction. It is may be due to lack of experience and knowledge.
The limited subjects taught to monks are not sufﬁ cient in such a globalized and competitive 
world today. Buddhist monks have to approach to modern issues. It would not possible to respond 
to modern issues without the knowledge of modern sciences. In order to help the society with such 
issues, monks also need to learn modern subjects as part of their education (pariyatti). The combina-
tion of both traditional and modern education would be very helpful for a proper understanding of 
the modern issues. Veerachart Nimanong, in his paper ‘Educational Inequality of Buddhist Monks 
and Novices in Thailand’, found out that according to the young monks and novices both traditional 
and university systems have to promote side by side. Their mutual integration supports for a better 
understanding of Buddhism and also secular problems.47In recent times, Buddhist has realized that 
the monastic curriculum needs to be expanded, “the traditional monastery education...had failed to 
achieve these ends. The old system was too diffused, too fragmented, and too independent-minded to 
meet the needs of times.”48 And the modern Buddhist institution also tries to expand the curriculum 
with some new subjects. Counseling psychology could be added to monks’ education because it has 
become part of the monks’ life in the society. 
The interdependent nature of the society is clearly demonstrated in Sigalaka -sutta49.There 
are ﬁ ve duties of the laity towards the monks and six duties of the monks towards the laity. The laity 
supplies the monks with physical and material supports including the daily offering of food and the 
donating of other requisites when needed. In return, the monks provide mental comforts to laity 
by means of counseling and teaching them the Dharma. These six duties of the monks towards 
the laity are concerned with ethical, spiritual and mental supports. Monks have to point out them 
what is wrong and encourage them living a good and ethical life. When they are in con ﬂ icts, they 
46  Brahm, Ajahn, 2008, Opening the Door of Your Heart, Australia: Hachette, p. 97.
47  Nimanong, Veerachart, 2002, Educational Inequality of Buddhist Monks and Novices in Thailand, Graduate School of 
Philosophy and Religious Studies, Assumption University, accessed on Aug 28 2011,  (See also PDF http://assumptionuniv.
academia.edu/veerachart/Papers/532404/The_Educational_Inequality_of_Buddhist_Monks_and_Novices_in_Thailand 
48  McDaniel, Justin Thomas, 2009, Gathering Leaves and Lifting words, Bangkok: Silkworm Books, p. 109.
49  Walse, Maurice, tr., 1995, The Long Discourses of the Buddha, Boston: Wisdom Publication, p. 335.
Role of Monk as Counselor
15
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
have to show compassion and set out resolving conﬂ icts. The Buddha advised monks to go and teach 
Dharma for the welfare and beneﬁ ts of the society as found in Mahavaggapali: 
“Walk, monks, on tour for the blessing of the manyfolk, for the happiness of the manyfolk 
out of compassion for the world, for the welfare, the blessing, the happiness of devas and men.”50
Therefore, the integration of both religious and secular subjects like psychology, counseling, 
sociology, etc. would help the monk students to understand the current problems of the world better 
and applicable of knowledge to solve the modern issues. 
Conclusion
The reﬂ ection of today society and its problems show that there are millions people suffer 
from depression and unbalance of psychological domain besides physical tortures. Importantly, 
Buddhism teaches to be the master of oneself nonetheless one’s mind is bigger than himself. 
We often meet people who fail to maintain one’s mental health and infected by psychological domain. 
They have enough wealth for physical needs, but never enough for psychological needs (lobha, dosa 
and moha). Buddhism as a religious institution of mental healing has being always offered canonical 
counseling techniques: the mindfulness meditation and through teachings. These help not only healing 
mental illness, but it improves a qualitative livelihood as well. In addition, the Buddhist teaching of 
dharma leads the people to right attitude and positive thoughts by handling badly accessing 
emotions. People would be bene ﬁ ted with moral standard by the bond to Buddhism as a spiritual 
path or religious institution. We can expect for healthy society balancing both spirituality and 
materiality by expanding mindfulness meditation to other ﬁ eld of treatments and peoples’ art of living. 
According to research ﬁ ndings, the importance of counseling is an indispensable service to 
the modern day and learning it by monks is crucial. The young generation of monks has understood 
that the wounded world needs to be healed. Therefore, at this gathering of the International Association 
of Buddhist Universities (IABU), I would like to take the opportunity to suggest the Buddhist 
universities to integrate counseling psychology as a part of monastic education.
50  Horner, I.B. tr., 1993, The Book of Discipline, V ol. XIV , Oxford: Pali Text Society, p. 28.
Conclusion
16
Conference
References
Primary Sources
Bhikkhu Nanamoli & Bhikkhu Bodhi, trs., 2005, The Middle Length Discourse of the Buddha , 
Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Burlingame, Eugene Watson, tr., 2005, Buddhist Legends Part I, II, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 
Publishers Private Limited.
Hare, E.M. tr., 1995, The Book of the Gradual Sayings, V ol. III, Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Horner, I.B. tr., 1993, The Book of Discipline, V ol. XIV , Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Ireland, Jonh D. tr., 1997, The Udāna and Ittivuttaka, Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Walse, Maurice, tr., 1995, The Long Discourses of the Buddha, Boston: Wisdom Publication. 
Woodward, E.L. tr., 1995, The Book of Gradual Sayings, V ol. II, Oxford: Pali Text Society. 
Secondary Source
Brahm, Ajahn, 2008, Opening the Door of Your Heart, Australia: Hachette.
Carlson, Linda, Speca, Michael, Mindfulness-based Cancer Recovery , Oakland: New Harbinger 
Publications, 2010, Google Book Search, Accessed on 30 Oct 2011.
Bloch. S., 2006, Introduction to the Psychotherapies, 4th ed., New York: Oxford University Press.
Burks, H.M. and Stefﬂ re, B., 1979, Theories of Counseling, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Feltham, Colin, 1995, What is Counseling?, Trowbridge: Redwood Books.
de Silva, Padmasiri, 2005, An Introduction to Buddhist Psychology, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
de Silva, Padmasiri, 2010, ‘ The Joyless Economy: The Pathology of a Culture which calls for 
an Awakening’, Global Recovery: The Buddhist Perspective, Conference V olume, Peoples, 
Dion, ed., Ayutthaya: Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University.
de Silva, Padmal, 2010, ‘Buddhist Psychology: Exploring Practical And Theoretical Aspects’ , 
New Horizons in Buddhist Psychology, Kwee, Maurits G.T. ed., Ohio: Taos Institute 
Publications.
de Silva, Padmasiri, An Introduction to Mindfulness-based Counseling, Sri Lanka: Sarvodaya Vishva 
Lekha, 2008
Jayaratne, Chandana, Dr., 2010, ‘Buddhist Pirit Chants for Mental and physical Well Being- 
A Scientiﬁ c Approach’, Global Recovery: The Buddhist Perspective, Conference V olume, 
Ayutthaya: Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University.
References
17
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Kalupahana, David. J., 2010, ‘ Miracles: An Early Buddhist View’ , New Horizons in Buddhist 
Psychology, Kwee, Maurits G.T. ed., Ohio: Taos Institute Publications.
McLeod, John, 2009, An Introduction to Counseling , Glasgow: Open University Press Open 
University Press.
McDaniel, Justin Thomas, 2009, Gathering Leaves and Lifting Words, Bangkok: Silkworm Books.
Nauriyal, D.K., Drummond, Machael S. & Lal, Y .B. eds., 2006, Buddhist Thoughts and Applied 
Psychological Research, London and New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group. 
Nissanka, HSS, 2009, Buddhist Psychotherapy, Dehiwala: Buddhist Cultural Centre.
Rhys Davids, T.W., & William Stede, 2004, The Pali-English Dictionary , New Delhi: Asia 
Educational Service. 
Segal, Zindel V ., J. Mark G. Williams, John D. Teasdale, 2002,  Mindfulness-based Cognitive Therapy 
for Depression,  New York: The Guilford Press, Google Book Search, accessed on 29 Sept 
2011.
2005, The Oxford Dictionary English, 2nd ed. Soanes, Catherine & Stevenson, Angus, eds. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
2008, The Cambridge Advanced Learner’ s Dictionary, 3rd ed. Singapore: Green Giant Press. 
Electronic:
Durkheim, Émile, 2005, Suicide: A Study in Sociology, London and New York: Routledge Taylor & 
Francis Group. (See also PDF:  http://swauop.yolasite.com/resources/Durkheim%20-%20
suicide.pdf )
Blake, John, 03 June 2010, Are there dangers being ‘spiritual but not religious’?, CNN  Living, 
accessed on 22 Sept 2011, http://articles.cnn.com/2010-06-03/living/spiritual.but.not.
religious_1_spiritual-community-religious-god?_s=PM:LIVING 
Nimanong, Veerachart, Dr. 2002,  Educational Inequality of Buddhist Monks and Novices in Thailand, 
Graduate School of Philosophy and Religious Studies, Assumption University, (See also 
http://assumptionuniv.academia.edu/veerachart/Papers/532404/The_Educational_Inequality_
of_Buddhist_Monks_and_Novices_in_Thailand ) 
Kabat Zin, Mindfulness Stress Reduction and Healing, 8 March 2007, Online video clip, YouTube, 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rSU8ftmmhmw – accessed on 14 Dec 2011.
Rogers, C.R., 1975, Empathic : An Unappreciated Way of Being, California , accessed on 10 Sept 
2011, (See PDF http://www.sageofasheville.com/pub_downloads/EMPATHIC_AN_UN-
APPRECIATED_WAY_OF_BEING.pdf
Tacy, David, June, 2003, Spirituality and the Prevention of Suicide , ABC News, accessed on 
20 Aug 2011, http://www.abc.net.au/religion/stories/s972766.htm  
18
Conference
Wheeler, Mark, Practice of Mindfulness Meditation Slows the Progression of HIV , Study Shows, 
24 July 2008, http://newsroom.ucla.edu/portal/ucla/mindfulness-meditation-slows-
progression-53819.aspx – accessed on 29 Sept 2011.
Boredom, Wikipedia, Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopaedia, Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., accessed 
on 11 Sept 2011: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boredom#cite_note-3
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy, accessed on 11 Aug 2011: http://www.mbct.com/
Mind and Life Organization, accessed on 11 Aug 2011: http://www.mindandlife.org/about/mission/
The Independent News, accessed on 26 Aug 2011: http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/this-britain/
the-happiest-man-in-the-world-433063.html
What is Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction?, accessed on 11 Aug 2011: http://www.mindfulliving
programs.com/whatMBSR.php
World Health Organization, accessed on accessed on 20 Aug 2011: http://www.who.int/mental_
health/prevention/suicide/suicideprevent/en/ 
World Health Organization, accessed on 19 Aug 2011: http://www.who.int/mental_health/management/
depression/deﬁ nition/en/index.html
World Health Organization, accessed on 19 Aug 2011: http://www.searo.who.int/en/section1174/
section1199/section1567_6741.htm
World Health Organization, accessed on 19 Aug 2011: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/
releases/2011/humanitarian_relief_20110819/en/index.html
19
Buddhist Pre Marriage Counseling
Dr. Sarath Chandrasekara
Sri Lanka International Buddhist Academy 
Marriage is an important step in one’s life. Marriage helps one to maintain happiness, though 
sharing life with another may become troublesome for various reasons. More than ever before, young 
people pay attention to Pre Marriage counseling because of those very problems which arise from 
sharing life. It is also noticed that some people attend counseling prior to their marriage because it 
provides support and guidance necessary to resolve both potential and actual problems. In all of this 
the family as an institution provides the basis for one’s personal development. When families are 
disturbed in their development, people seek family counseling. If one family member becomes seriously 
ill, it impacts everyone in the family. Family counseling can be applied to families in various ways, 
either with individual family members or as a group with many family members who experience 
the same problem within the family or even with additional families who experience similar problems. 
The important points to examine when providing Buddhist Pre Marriage counseling are; what does 
the family mean to each of the members? How do they maintain the family as a group? What are 
their common goals? And what is the objective of the counseling? Generally, the main goal of Pre 
Marriage counseling is directed at establishing equilibrium within the family. 
Family is a complex unit characterized by several orders and sub orders. Through counseling, 
family members become conscious of their roles, which is essential in maintaining the equilibrium. 
According to Mehler, the family can be viewed in two units namely parents and children, and 
husband and wife. The harmony between the family members is highly dependent on their ability to 
communicate effectively among themselves. It is often noted that in dysfunctional families, sound 
communication is lacking and it is due to the lack of ability to communicate that families are falling 
apart. Through counseling, the stress and mental pressures that arise through unhealthy family dynamics 
can be resolved, leading to a balance and harmony between the family members. Thus, an important 
task in succeeding as a family is effective communication. 
Often, parents expect their off spring to achieve the dreams that they could not achieve for 
themselves. Therefore, the parents make decisions on behalf of their children in order to achieve 
their lost dreams. If children do not agree with the decisions made by parents, there will be conﬂ icts 
between the two groups. When expectations remain unfulﬁ lled, both parties become frustrated. Also 
in these matters the home, school, parents and teachers bear a huge responsibility in the individual 
development of a child. In such cases counseling must be done individually. Another aspect of 
family counseling is establishing mutual relationship between family members. A problem that the 
counselor may encounter is the difﬁ culty in getting all the family members to a single meeting due to 
various reasons. However, difﬁ cult it may become, such meetings need to be arranged to help rebuild 
relationships between the parents and the children, which remains an important task in counseling. 
The concept of family receives signiﬁ cant attention from both sociologists and psychologists. 
Their approach to resolve family issues are known as family therapies which constitute treatments in 
which the whole family is the focus, rather than an individual family member. Social scientists have 
shown that there are three basic human expectations namely safety, satisfaction of the basic needs 

20
Conference
and undisturbed life. Also the dynamics arising from emotional states and interpersonal relationships 
among the family members contribute to the personal development and the welfare of each and every 
family member. For example, Murray Bowen explains that the family must be examined as a system 
with chronic anxiety as the basis of unhealthy family dynamics in which the place of siblings is 
given an important role. The structural theorist Salvador Minuchin explains that attentions must be 
paid to role relationships within the hierarchical family structure in family counseling. Jay Haley’s 
strategic therapy looks at the family issues from a problem solving perspective. Virginia Satir, 
a feminist family theorist, examines family issues through interpersonal communications. These 
are indications that there are numerous ways to look at families in resolving unhealthy dynamics. 
A healthy family is the corner stone of a society and thus contributes not only to the progress of 
an individual and the society but also to a country at large. The two elements, the individual and 
the society are interdependent where one needs the other to survive. Social development evolves as 
a result of their interactions within this relationship. All these different methods provide an in depth 
understanding of family dynamics for the purpose of counseling and therapy. 
Long before all these counseling methods were known, the Buddha, knowing that every 
human being wishes a peaceful and happy life, offered several discourses on healthy family dynamics 
and successful family Marriage life. Before we get marriage getting ready for the marriage is most 
important aspects and then we can learn many things in advance to the marriage. In achieving 
a peaceful and a happy life, the Buddha had shown a young Count Singāla a distinct path as discussed in 
the Sigālovada Sutta1 of the Dīgha Nikaya (D.N.). Singala had the habit of waking up in the wee-small 
hours, taking a bath and in soaking wet clothes, worshiping six celestial directions namely the East, 
the South, the West, the North, the Bottom and the Top, seeking progress and happiness as a family 
tradition. After seeing this unrewarding activity, the Buddha strategically recommended to Singala 
to replace the six directions of worship with six groups worthy of respect, attention and support 
and to follow them in his search for peace and happiness. The recommended replacements were 
the Parents to the East, the Teachers to the South, the Family to the West, the Friends to the North, 
the Servants to the Bottom and the Noble Clergy to the Top. In this discourse, the Buddha spoke 
clearly of sixty one duties and responsibilities for the individual toward the above mentioned groups 
promoting harmony in the family and justice to the society. This list includes almost all the factors 
that are being discussed in the modern day family counseling and therapies. 
In the Pali Suttas, the world family may be referred as Kula, Vamsa or Gotta.2 Though 
Singālovada Sutta takes a prominent place in Buddhist Family pre marriage Counseling, several 
other Suttas and Jātaka Stories on this subject can be found in the Pāli Canon.   Some of them are 
as follows: Mahaparinibbana sutta, Aggannu Sutta, Uggaha Sutta, Pattakamma Sutta, Migas āla 
Sutta, Sabbrahma Sutta, Vasala Sutta, Parabhava Sutta, Mahagovinda Sutta, Sattabhariya Sutta, 
Culavyuha Sutta, Mallik ā Sutta, Cullavedella Sutta, Vatthu Sutta, Natthiputta Sutta, Dhitu Sutta, 
Vepulla Sutta, Vanijja Sutta, Vyaggapajja Sutta, Kinti Sutta, Parisa Sutta, Kosambi Sutta, Mahanama 
Sutta, Sakkanamassa Sutta, Itthibandhana Sutta, Purisa Bandhana Sutta, Sama Jataka and 
Māthuposatha Jātaka 
1  D.N.Sig ālovada sutta
2  Pali English Dictionary  p.528
21
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Parent – Children Relationships
The Buddha used the analogy of the celestial direction east to depict the cardinal importance 
of parents in one’s life. As the sun rises from the East depicting its cardinal importance as the ﬁ rst 
indicator of directions at dawn, there is none more valuable than one’s parents in one’s world. Parents 
give birth to their off-spring, bring them up and show them the right direction in this world, sacriﬁ cing 
for their growth and development. The Buddha mentioned that it is never possible for one to completely 
re-pay one’s parents for these gifts and sacriﬁ ces. This becomes clear in the Sabbrahma Sutta3 of 
the Anguttara Nik āya  in which the Buddha pays tribute to parents as “ Brahmāthi bikkhave 
māthupittunna metan adhivachanan pubbhadevathi, ahuneiyathi, bhikkave mathupinnametan 
adhivacanan”. This means that the Buddha strategically endorsed parents in the place of Brahma 
ascribing them holiness. According to the Hindu philosophy the world is created by the Brahma. 
In this context, the parents who possess such Brahma qualities should be honored as such. His discourse 
on parents as “matapitanukampitassa mahanama kulaputtassa vuddhiyeva paticancha na parihani” 
stated also in the in the Anguttara Nikaya Panch Vagga. This means that the individual who receives 
the wholesome blessings of the parents can anticipate wholesome progress rather than unwholesome 
demise. 
If we take note of the Buddha’s biography, it becomes evident how the Buddha treated his 
parents. Subsequent to his mother Queen Maha Maya’ s rebirth, He appeared in the Tusita Divine 
Abode to expound dhamma to her joy and comfort and to help her reach enlightenment.  When King 
Bimbisara, His father, was sick, he expounded dhamma to help him heal his illness. The Buddha 
also helped his step-mother Queen Maha Prajapathi Gotami not only to enter but also to establish 
the Order of Bikkuhnis. All of these depict examples of how He respected his parents. 
In the Mahā Mangala Sutta, it is expounded that looking after the parents constitutes a major 
factor in happiness of an individual. Those who do not look after their parents cater to their down 
fall and suffering as discussed in the Vasala Sutta. According to Pattakamma Sutta, looking after 
the welfare of parents ( matapitharan sukkheti pinethi) constitutes a responsibility of the children. 
From children, the parents have only a few expectations. The children are supposed to support them 
(bahathone karissati); perform duties incumbent upon them (kaccena thesan karissati), keep up the 
lineage and good tradition (kulavansam thapessati), be worthy of their heritage (dayajjan patijjati), 
and transfer merits in due time (petanan kalakantanan dhakkinan anupadassati).
There are also expectations of the children from their parents. They are: restrain children 
from evil ( pāpā nivarenti ), exhort them in virtue ( kalyāna nivesanti ), give them skills for 
a wholesome profession (sikkhan sikkhapenti); encourage them to a suitable marriage (patirupena 
dārena sanjojenti) and the timely hand over of inheritance.
Husband –Wife Relationships
In pre marriage counseling, pay more attention to learn the relationship between the partners. 
The trust between the husband and the wife is the basis for the welfare of the other family members.  
In the Singāovada Sutta, the Buddha discusses ﬁ ve factors for the husband to uphold and treat his 
3  A.II.Sabrahma Sutta p. 132
Husband –Wife Relationships
Parent – Children Relationships
22
Conference
wife. They are namely showing respect ( sammāna), being courteous ( avamānna), being faithful 
(anatichariya), handing over authority of the household management ( issariya vossaggaha) and 
providing her with adornments (alankāranappadanena).
It is the duty of the husband to honor, love and care for his wife. In our society every one 
of us likes to be respected and honored. Similarly the same should not be denied to the wife when 
it’s due. Also the husband shall not insult his wife nor shall he speak roughly or use foul language 
to hurt her feelings. A husband shall avoid involving in extramarital affairs. Now-a-days, such 
relationships could lead to sexually transmitted disease and many other illnesses such as Hepatitis 
B among others. These kind of unwholesome activities lead to disharmony and distrust between 
the partners and make the family unit dysfunctional. They may end up in divorce, irreversibly 
destroying the relationship. The wife also has ﬁ ve duties and responsibilities toward her husband. 
They are namely performing her duties (susanvihita kammanta), showing hospitality to relatives of 
both sides (susangahita parijana), watching over the goods brought home (samhatan anurakkhanti) 
and enthusiastic and skillful discharge of all her duties (dakkhava hoti anlasa sabbanivesu). These 
duties and responsibilities need to be taken seriously in order to create a harmonious environment 
for family members to grow. For example, the wife could take a lead role in the manner in which 
the family treat their friends and relatives; especially when treating relative on the husband’s 
side. When neglected, this leads to a lot of dysfunction in all these areas, giving rise to stress and 
unpleasantness resulting in con ﬂ icts among family members. These things can adversely affect 
the individual development of the family members. It is the wife’s responsibility to take care of the wealth 
earned and spend it in a manner to promote and achieve success of the family in terms of the family’s 
future economic development and personal growth. The economic stability of families can be 
a strength for resolving family con ﬂ icts. It may also enable them to achieve unity and harmony 
among family members, when in conﬂ ict. 
The Buddhist pre marriage Counseling is based on resolving issues before they turn into 
nasty con ﬂ icts. It’s an approach based on problem prevention rather than con ﬂ ict resolution. It 
addresses the root causes and effects and ﬁ nds ways to prevent issues from becoming a conﬂ ict. If 
the husband and wife attend to their duties and responsibilities, their family experiences harmony 
and progress. This is the balance or the equilibrium conducive for the family to grow. This is the 
goal of the Buddhist pre marriage Counseling.
Though proclaimed 2600 years ago, the Buddha’s teaching is aimed not only to achieve 
Nibbāna, but also to contain invaluable and signi ﬁ cant socio-psychological guidelines toward 
a pragmatic approach which remains applicable to family life even in modern day society. The Buddha 
appreciated the advisory guidelines given to Visākha, the prominent lay female attendant at the time, 
by her father prior to her marriage. They are as follows:
• The issues or problems arising within the household should remain and resolve within 
the family democratically. (it is not about secrecy within a few family members)
• The issues or problems from outside the family should be left outside
• Give loans only to those who can afford to pay back.
•  Do not give loans to those who cannot afford to pay back.
• Give to those who deserved to be given within the affordability without anticipating 
anything in return.
23
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
• Sit in a place that enables one to stand up when an elder arrives
• Eat healthy
• Sleep healthy
• Support your husband in all his right and appropriate efforts
• Care for and be hospitable to the parents of the husband
The Buddha also describes seven different types of wives in the Sapthabhariyā Sutta.4
Accordingly, they are as follows:
• Vadhakasama Bahriy ā (Hostile wife): The wife who insults the husband and has unethical 
relationships with other men.
• Chorasama Bahriy ā (Stealing wife): the wife is similar to a thief and spends and destroys 
the wealth earned by her husband.
• Aiyasama Bahriy ā (Uncomfortable wife): the wife who speaks foul language and puts 
her husband in a very discomforting and an embarrassing position.
• Matusama Bahriy ā (Motherly wife): the wife is similar to the mother of the husband 
who safeguards all earnings of the husband and taking care of him like a child.
• Bhaginisama Bahriy ā (Sisterly wife): the wife who is like a sister and takes care of 
the husband similar to how a sister looks after a brother.
• Sakisama Bahriy ā (Harmonious wife): the wife who becomes happy even at the sight 
of the husband and is happy all the time and maintains happiness of the husband.
• Dasisama Bahriy ā (Servant wife): the wife serves like a servant attending to all duties 
and looks after the husband.
In the Sanvāsa Sutta5, the Buddha noted that the mutual relationship that exists between 
the man and wife may take the following characteristics.
A corpse like man (chovo) lives with  a  corpse like wife (chāvā)
A corpse like man (chovo) lives a with a goddess like wife (devi)
A god like man (devo) lives a with a corpse like wife (chāvā) 
A god like man (devo) lives a with a goddess like wife (devi)
The most harmonious couple is the god like man lives with a goddess like wife. This 
compatibility helps a family to develop family harmony, promoting individual growth while 
becoming a blessing to society.  In promoting happiness in married life, the late Venerable Dr. K Sri 
Dhammananda6 wrote the following to describe the mutual relationship that should exist between 
man and wife. A wife should provide the husband with love, attention, family expectations, trust, 
care of the children, household efﬁ ciency, food preparation, help to resolve problems, and the support 
he needs. In the same manner the husband has to fulﬁ ll toward his wife certain duties such as kindness, 
courtesy, socialization, safety, fairness, affection, honesty and civilized behavior and support. 
4  A.IV .Sattabhariy āSutta pp 414
5  A.II.Samv āsa Sutta p.110
6  K.Dhammananada. A Happy Married Life, pp 25-26
24
Conference
The emotions such as love, affection and care are clearly explained in the Purishabandana 
Sutta7 and Itthibandana Sutta8 of the Anguttara Nikaya. The emotion of love between the man and 
women arises through the experiences involving the ﬁ ve senses: namely the ﬁ gure, the smile, 
the talk, the tears, the clothes and the apparel, the voice and the touch. According to the Teachings 
of the Buddha, the powerful emotion of love evolves mutually in both individuals in the background 
of these experiences and progresses as a strong force incomparable to any other forces known to 
humans. The mutual love, care and trust are fundamental to the existence of a family. All of their 
problems can be resolved through effective and open communication as partners. This gives rise to 
happiness and balance. The Buddha has recommended ten points for the civic life of the average 
householder (prutagjana).  They are as follow:
• Attend to the needs of your parents
• Devote yourself for the wellbeing of your children
• Provide safety and welfare to your wife
• Maintain mutual understanding and civic duties of the married life 
• Look after the needs of your relatives
• Respect the elders
• Invite divine beings to rejoice in your wholesome deeds
• Bless the departed to be well, happy and peaceful
• Abide by the law of the land and
• Ground your family in a harmonious way of life free of unworthy efforts.
Once it was brought to the attention of the Buddha the question of an old man marrying 
a very young woman. In one of the Suttās in the Anguttara Nikaya, The Buddha points out that due 
to mental and physical tensions and the distractions in these circumstances, the family life can-
not be maintained successfully. In the same Nikāya, it is mentioned that when a person is born to 
a harmonious family, this person becomes a blessing not only to the family but also to their environment 
of friends and others similar to the summer rains that make the crops thrive while generating 
a “good feeling” all around. In the Migāsala Sutta, the Buddha applies the term “sadāra santushti” 
to explain that with harmony, husband and wife gain the maximum bene ﬁ ts of their sexual life, 
the pinnacle of married life.  The successful married life or a harmonious family is a blessing not 
only to the people around them but it is also a state to which even the divine beings pay respect, 
according to the Sakkaanamassa Sutta.9 
Writing an analytical account of Singālovada Sutta , S. Daya Fernando 10 explains that 
the wife shall not be understood to be a slave of the husband while both of them enjoy equal rights 
in the partnership which becomes a close association of two trusting friends. 
The book “The Chicken and the Duck”, of  Ajahn Chah provides a good anecdote for pre 
marriage and family counseling.  A newly married couple went for a walk together in a wood, one 
7  A.V .Purisa Bandhana Sutta p .80-81
8  A.V .Itthibandana Sutta  p.80-81
9  S.I Sakkanamassa Sutta .p.416 
10  S.Daya Fernando. Budu Samaye Desap ālana Cintanaya (Sinhala Edition)p.175
25
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
ﬁ ne summer’s evening after dinner’ They were having such a wonderful time being together until 
they heard a sound in the distance:
“Quack! Quack”
“Listen, said the wife, that must be a chicken”
“No no’ that was a duck,” said the husband.
“No, I’m sure that was a chicken,” she said.
“Impossible, Chickens go ‘Cock a doodle doo’ ducks go ‘Quack, Quack!” That’s a duck, darling,” 
he said, with the ﬁ rst signs of irritation.
“Quack! Quack” It went again.
“See! It’s a duck” he said.
“No dear’ that’s a chicken. I’m positive” she asserted, digging in her heels.
“Listen wife! That is a duck. D-u-c-k, duck! Got it? He said strongly.
“But it’s a chicken” she protested.
“It’s a friggin’ duck, you, you…”
And it went “Quack, Quack! Again before he said something he oughtn’t.
The wife was almost in tears. “But it’s a chicken”
The husband saw the tears welling up in his wife’s eyes and, at least, remembered why he had married 
her. His face softened and he said gently, “Sorry, darling, I think you must be right. That is a chicken.”
“Thank you darling,” She said and she squeezed his hand.
“Quack! Quack!” came the sound through the woods, as they continued their walk together in love.
The insight that the husband ﬁ nally awakened to was this: who cares whether it is a chicken 
or a duck? What was much more important was their harmony together and that they could enjoy their 
walk on such a ﬁ ne summer evening. How many marriages are broken over unimportant matters? 
How many divorces cite “chicken or duck” stuff.
When we re ﬂ ect on this story, we will remember one’s priorities. The marriage is more 
important than being right about whether it is a chicken or a duck. And besides, how many times 
have we been absolutely, certainly, and positively convinced that we are right- only to ﬁ nd our later, 
we were in fact totally wrong? Who knows, that could have been a genetically modi ﬁ ed chicken 
made to sound like a duck!
Throughout this paper I have attempted to point out the importance of the Buddhist 
principles in pre marriage counseling. Therefore, in concluding, it becomes obvious that maintaining 
the functionality of families impacts society because the family is the smallest unit of society. 
The family unit provides a conducive environment for the emergence of a united and just society.  
In the Buddha’s Teachings, we recognize the concept that each person is responsible for his/her own 
actions and behavior and must accept the accompanying results whether good or bad. The teachings 
also recommend guidelines to lead a harmonious family life, as an average householder, with 
wholesome outcomes indicating that this Teaching is not only about human suffering and reaching 
26
Conference
Nibbana. The importance lies in the fact that these principles of counseling are focused to alleviate 
root causes in an approach to prevent problems from arising, rather than problem solving. It’s a way 
of family health promotion.  Though the goal of this Teaching is achieving enlightenment, the same 
concepts can be applied to maintaining a harmonious life. From this discussion it becomes evident 
that most of the concepts of modern psychology and sociology are similar to the Buddha’s Teachings. 
Only through analytical discussions can the Buddhist concepts be explained to the beneﬁ t of people 
who need help in healing and achieving inner peace and happiness.
27
Buddhist Social Work: 
A Case Study of the Samrong General Hospital
Petcharat Lovichakorntikul1, John Walsh2, Pacapol Anurit3
School of Management, Shinawatra International University
Prelude:
Human Resource Development (HRD) is a crucial element in contemporary organizations 
and determines their future to a signiﬁ cant extent, especially in the healthcare business, which has 
been changing and developing according to emerging trends such as the problems of insufﬁ ciency 
and the inequitable distribution of healthcare professionals, as well as certain morality and ethical 
issues. While the public perception is that healthcare professionals who are working to heal patients 
and save lives must have kind and generous minds, this is not always the case and, in HRD, it remains 
necessary to develop the minds, attitudes and perceptions of healthcare professionals to be ready 
to serve others. Many Thai people are very familiar with Buddhism because most ceremonies and 
ways of life are related to Buddhist cultural practices. Buddhist teachings are implanted into their 
minds as well as the understanding that their ancestors followed the same methods and principles. 
Some believe that the nature of belied is changing along with changes in contemporary society, 
which privileges material goods above spiritual ones. In response, it is necessary to reinvigorate 
Dhamma teaching so that it speaks more clearly to present generations. This research is, therefore, 
based on certain Buddhist ethical principles, such as the ﬁ ve precepts (Pañcasīla), the basis of success 
(Iddhipada 4) , the sublime states of mind (Brahmavihāra 4) , and meditation. These have been 
implemented in a Samut Prakan province hospital since its inception. Hospital founders concentrated 
on creating ethical and potential human resources rather than creating task-speciﬁ c activities. This is 
a qualitative research study featuring management level and operational level employees in in-depth 
face-to-face interviews together with a focus group with relevant participants exploring the Buddhist 
social work scheme in this hospital. Findings and recommendations from the research are presented.
1. Introduction
Once newly graduated students change the academic life for the working world, most of them 
look for satisfying jobs. Important factors include being well-known and secure companies offering 
reasonable salary. However, they are rarely able to obtain what they want because most companies 
wish to minimize their costs and maximize their pro ﬁ ts. Some organizations, especially in Asian 
countries, require employees to be responsible for multi-tasking. For instance, one person could 
occupy more than two positions with diverse duties. Previously, especially in Japan, high levels of 
loyalty to ﬁ rms were engineered. It was common for people to work for one company from graduation 
to retirement. Moreover, they might serve that company through three generations. However, many 
1  Petcharat Lovichakorntikul is a Doctoral Candidate at Shinawatra International University, Bangkok, Thailand
2  Dr. John Walsh is an Assistant Professor, School of Management, Shinawatra International University
3  Dr. Pacapol Anurit is an Assistant Professor, School of Management, Shinawatra International University
Prelude:
1. Introduction
28
Conference
of these attitudes, values and lifestyle have changed. New generations do not care to work for a single 
large company for their whole career. Owing to economic and social development, they have better 
opportunities to vary their working lives, start their own businesses or create their own working 
environment. This has changed recruitment patterns. Some companies have responded by promoting 
the idea of lifelong employment to attract new graduates. The Samrong General Hospital, for 
example, brings Buddhist principles to the workplace and promotes socialization in Buddhist concepts 
for staff members. The founders and top executive management perform as if they were parents of 
their staff members and create a “paternalist” environment. They feel happy to work there under 
Buddhist doctrines that they practice in their real daily lives both for personal and working reasons.
2. Literature Review
There are many subdivisions within Buddhism, but most can be classiﬁ ed into three major 
branches: Theravāda (“Way of the Elders”), Mahayana (“Greater Vehicle”) and Vajrayana (“Diamond 
Vehicle”). Theravāda is the older version of Buddhism which believes in nibb āna, that everyone 
can attain it by purifying the mind and abandoning all worldly pleasures . This school follows 
the basic principles of the P āli canon and, by this standard, may be identi ﬁ ed with primitive 
Buddhism. Large numbers of people in India, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, the Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic and Cambodia are Theravāda Buddhists. Mahayana has been subdivided into 
several diverse schools, such as Zen, Pure Land and Nichiren, with the purpose of reinterpreting 
the Buddha’s esoteric doctrines to gain universal acceptance. The People’s Republic of China, Japan, 
Korea and Vietnam are within the Mahayana sect and exhibit a more liberal interpretation of 
the Buddha’s teaching. Vajrayana Buddhism tradition is an esoteric sect that is predominant in Tibet, 
Mongolia and Nepal and promotes the idea of enlightenment being achievable as if being struck by 
a lightning bolt (Anonymous; Anonymous, Religion Facts, 2007).
Brummans and Hwang (2010) conducted an empirical research study into Mahayana 
Buddhism concerning the organization of everyday practices within the Buddhist Compassion 
Relief Tzu Chi Foundation, which is a Taiwanese Buddhist nonproﬁ t voluntary organization. They 
found that the practice of Buddhist compassion and wisdom were implemented in an organizational 
context, showing signiﬁ cant interactions between Buddhist philosophy and organizational activities. 
In Thailand, the majority of the population is Buddhist and, thus, most ethical principles come 
from Theravāda Buddhism, its beliefs and faiths which are the basic foundations in ﬂ uencing Thai 
people’s thoughts, personalities and actions. The Buddhist philosophy is both simple and very 
practical. It has been applied to some organizational contexts  (Lovichakorntikul & Walsh, 2011). 
Wongphaet (2010) described the “Five Precepts” as a foundation to develop peoples’ minds with 
a direct impact upon job performance. Further, the “Iddhipāda 4” inspires aspiration, effort, dedication 
and investigation and is a core part in the working life. The “ Brahmavihāra 4” is composed of 
loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and neutrality. It is at the heart of the issues involved 
in people living together. At the Samrong General Hospital, when there is a meeting, this is also 
an opportunity to provide Dhamma teaching and give their employees various insights and suggestions 
(Lovichakorntikul & Walsh, 2011). 
2. Literature Review
29
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Buddhist Principle: The Five Precepts (Pañcasīla) 
The Lord Buddha stressed to all people the importance of trying to develop the soul in 
the midst of the hardships of life on earth. People can develop themselves to win the bliss of 
enlightenment or the highest level possible in the next world, which is also known as eternal bliss 
or nibbāna (Cittasobhano, 1982). In addition, to protect lives, property, family, true information 
and the wisdom to which human beings can aspire, the Lord Buddha has laid down the ﬁ ve precepts 
or Pañcasīla as a human virtue that is part of the basic morality of the Buddhist philosophy. 
Phrabhavanaviriyakhun (2010) interpreted the meanings of each precept in different aspects as 
explained in the table below:
Order of Precepts Explanations
1. To abstain from killing any living beings To give life safety to oneself by not killing  
other people/animals
2. To abstain from stealing or taking what 
is not given
To give property safety to oneself by not 
stealing others’ belongings
3. To abstain from sexual misconduct To give spouse safety to oneself by not 
have sexual relationship with others’ 
spouses
4. To abstain from telling a lie, false 
speech
To give faithfulness to oneself and others
5. To abstain from intoxicants causing 
carelessness
To give consciousness to oneself and 
others
Source: Phrabhavanaviriyakhun (2010).
This concept is similar that of Thanissaro Bhikkhu (2011), who explained that if we maintain 
the standards of the precepts, as the Buddha mentioned, we are providing unlimited safety for all lives, 
particularly the ﬁ rst precept. We also provide unlimited safety for other possessions and sexuality, 
and unlimited truthfulness and mindfulness in our communication with them. When we ﬁ nd that we 
can trust ourselves in matters like these, we gain an undeniably healthy sense of self-respect. In this 
interpretation, the concept of reciprocity is made very clear. The actions of an individual will rebound 
directly and proportionately in the future. The temporal delay is uncertain but causality is certain. 
While it may appear that unjust acts are not being punished, this may be an issue of temporality. 
The same, presumably, must be true for rewards to be received for virtuous acts performed. It may 
also be the case that the reward for the act will not arrive in the same form in which the original act 
manifested itself (Lovichakorntikul & Walsh, 2011). Keeping the ﬁ ve precepts in daily life means 
not only avoiding antagonism but also protecting other people’s lives by giving them safety in these 
ﬁ ve aspects. Consequently, the society would be peaceful and orderly. 
30
Conference
Normally, working in a healthcare organization, to maintain the ﬁ rst precept is not a problem. 
Wongphaet (2011) observed “We do not kill anyone, instead we help patients to be safe and save 
their lives also. But most interviewees agreed that taking the fourth precept is a really dif ﬁ cult 
one since they always talk nonsense, chatter or sometimes they have to comfort patients or soothe 
them. This is relevant to the business world as well. In this particular situation, the teaching from 
Phramongkolthepmuni (Mata, 2010) is a good example stating that the holy speech is worth doing 
because one will have a holy word from telling the truth and not be incoherent. People who observe 
the fourth precept will apparently have nice white teeth and a good smell. He or she will have holy 
and powerful speech which leads to success and truthfulness in the next life, if it can be sustained 
in this life.
Buddhist Principle: The Basis of Success (Iddhipāda 4)
It is the basis of success or path of accomplishment (Phradhammapi ṭaka, 2003) which 
consists of 1) Chanda: will, zeal, aspiration;  2)  Viriya: energy, effort, exertion, perseverance; 
3) Citta: thoughtfulness, active thought, dedication; and 4) Vīmaṁsā: investigation, examination, 
reasoning, testing. Whereas Phra Buddhadasa Bhikkhu (1957) identiﬁ ed that Iddhipāda 4 is the chain 
of continuous righteousness and each form of goodness has its own particular duty starting from
Chanda, which is the basic foundation supporting other virtues. Viriya is how to pursue until one 
reaches the target by acting bravely. Citta is the intention within one’s mind and not giving up 
from doing, including the sense of concentration. The last one, Vīmaṁsā is the way to investigate 
causes and effects and improve to the better and the best ultimately by having totally wisdom. With 
this virtue, it will take anyone to be successful in worldly life and in attaining the nibb āna at large 
(Phrarajabhavanavisudh, 2004). 
Buddhist Principle: The Sublime states of mind (Brahmavihāra 4)
This virtue is composed of 1) Mettā: loving-kindness, friendliness, goodwill; 2) Karuṇā: 
compassion; 3) Muditā: sympathetic joy, altruistic joy, no envy; and 4) Upekkhā: equanimity, poise, 
neutrality (Phradhammapiṭaka, 2003). Brahmavihāra 4 means the Dhamma of brahma which is 
the Dhamma principle for human beings and it will help us to have purely lives. Whoever can keep 
his or her mind neutrally, he or she can maintain the precepts at all times and might subsequently 
attain the wisdom within (Anonymous, 2004). 
3. Methodology
This paper is an empirical case study, consisting of research using a qualitative method along 
with the secondary data in order to scrutinize facts from the real situation in the Samrong General 
Hospital. Interviews were conducted in person and on an in-depth basis, in addition to focus groups; 
which were recorded and subsequently transcribed. Some interviewees were contacted in advance 
for interviews, so as to obtain the right and relevant participants. Other respondents were contacted 
by chance to balance the data, not to receive only well-prepared information and to address overly 
3. Methodology
31
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
homogeneity of data. The Managing Director, the Human Resource Manager, chiefs of various 
departments, and operational staff members were interviewed by answering speci ﬁ c questions. 
Further, their body language was also observed and it was found that this was meaningful to these 
ﬁ ndings. Secondary data from articles, Dhamma books, online accesses and thesis papers have also 
been integrated into the research.
4. Analysis - Overview of the Samrong General Hospital
The hospital was established in 1981 by a couple of medical doctors who desired to have 
a place to save the lives of patients and injured people in Samut Prakan province. Before that, it was 
very difﬁ cult to access remote hospitals in Bangkok and many patients would die before being able 
to receive medical treatment. When they opened the private clinic, there were only two hospitals 
available but now there are 26 private hospitals nearby. Thus it is highly competitive for the healthcare 
business in that area but the 250-bed Samrong General Hospital remains one of the leading medical 
institutions in Samut Prakan province because of its policies, management principles and, it is 
claimed, Buddhist-based organizational practices. 
Founders Dr. Sutep and Dr. Prapa Wongphaet graduated from German universities and had 
a clear vision that: “This hospital will save patients’ lives and help them to get better, we do not 
want to make any business or aim for pro ﬁ ts from patients’ lives.” Consequently, they have never 
ever asked any patients before helping them that “Do you have money?” or asked them to make 
a deposit in advance (Wongphaet, 2011; Wongsutal, 2011). The ﬁ rst thing for all employees to do 
for patients is to help and save their lives.
More than 600 staff members, including physicians, nurses, nursing assistants and back ofﬁ ce 
staff members serve about 1,800–2,000 outpatients daily. Approximately 60% of them are patients 
with the social security fund program, of whom some 110,000 people are registered with Samrong 
General Hospital. More than 600,000 patients are treated annually. From an internal survey, it was 
determined that patients were impressed with staff members and services. 
In 2000, the Samrong General hospital was the ﬁ rst in Samut Prakan province to receive ISO 
9002 certiﬁ cation and was recertiﬁ ed in 2006; it was also accredited by the Healthcare Accreditation 
Institute, receiving Hospital Accreditation (HA), again the ﬁ rst hospital to do so in Samut Prakan. 
In 2009, it was the ﬁ rst hospital in the province to receive ISO 9001 certiﬁ cation and, in 2011, HA 
reaccreditation was received. Since 2006, the hospital has received best organization award in Labour 
Relations for ﬁ ve years consecutively, which brought them pride. With a good relationship between 
employers and employees, this corporation sees no need for a labour union in its workplace. Thai 
law is very repressive towards freedom of association, freedom of speech and collective bargaining 
in the workplace. 
Organizational Policies
The ﬁ rst crucial policy of the Samrong General Hospital is to refuse to perform procedures 
which they consider to be morally questionable, such as abortion and sexual reassignment surgery. 
4. Analysis - 
Overview of the Samrong General Hospital
32
Conference
They claim they wish only to do ‘good’ and ethical actions, including “transparency” with respect 
to accounting and ﬁ nancial systems. In addition, they have just one accounting system for 
submission to the Revenue Department (RD) of Thailand ever since their establishment. As a result, 
Ms. Laiyangkurn (2011) indicated that this accounting and taxation system for the RD represents her 
most proud lifetime achievement. Being an honest person makes her feel comfortable and happy to 
work with and, consequently, the Government Saving Bank is in the process of providing Samrong 
General Hospital with a “Good Governance” award in the year 2011.
This policy also applies in the marketing department, in which they claim or launch any 
programs to customers, then they meant as they stated to them. As a Marketing Manager who has 
been with this organization since she was a trainee in the accounting section in 1982, Ms. Krigchak 
(2011) felt very proud of working in this hospital since she has never told a lie to her patients. 
Whatever she promises to her clients, she can do it without any change. She is happy with her life 
that she does not make any sins by breaking the fourth precept because of the hospital’s policy.
With the original intention, the founders wished to be a “safe shelter” for patients and 
employees in Samrong district. Moreover, they think that the hospital is a place that they could earn 
more merits because it is a place to save patients’ lives. Once the Social Security Of ﬁ ce operated 
in 1991, the Samrong General Hospital accepted employees and people who have a medical care 
service in 1992. Since then, they have been serving this group more than 20 years with as the same 
standards as other patients. Because of the large numbers of patients in this group and also other 
patients, the revenue could cover all expenses and make them pursue their objective.
To expand their business is not the main idea for them. They would prefer to have a small 
size that they can take a “closed-look” and prolong the family-like or paternalistic environment in 
their organization. Hence, they stress on “quality” more than “quantity.” 
For the master plan, everyone in the hospital participates in order to share their ideas and 
suggestions. They have plans for building up new generations to replace the old staff who are going 
to retire in the future by connecting them with Buddhist principles particularly the “Brahmavihāra
4.” Especially the loving-kindness, Mr. Wongphaet (2011) stated that it would help his new staff 
members who work for the operational level dramatically. According to the new employees, most 
of them are still young. They need to learn and have more responsibilities. Regularly they make 
some mistakes by their carelessness or being late to work, fortunately he handles these problems by 
having the senior staff to be in charge of this section. With her mercy and warm-hearted, she could 
sit in their hearts by means of giving sweets and snacks to them; understanding them; and talking 
with them nicely. 
Organizational Cultures
The dominant organizational culture of this ﬁ rm is to train its employees to be “good, smart, 
and happy” persons respectively. To compare the healthcare business staff with other ﬁ elds such as 
the manufacturing or factory staff, the conspicuous point is people who work for hospitals are likely 
to have tender minds and soft characters. It is much easier to train them. Therefore, it reﬂ ects to the 
organization’s cultures at some degrees. 
33
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
The Managing Director has expressed that every policies and projects should get started 
from the top and senior executive management going down to the operational level. The role model 
persons play a vital part for their subordinates to follow, then they should pay respect to everyone 
including their followers, and not look down to them. Subsequently, it will be like a chain reaction 
that will get back to the senders. As a small piece of jigsaws, everyone goes to the same direction 
and ultimate goal, eventually they will reach their aim. And it will be a nice “whole picture” of 
the corporate.
To support doing good deeds is a positive thinking to create a nice working atmosphere in 
the Samrong General Hospital. They encourage their employees who come up with good ideas and 
give them a chance to do so. Not only for the organization’s projects but also for employees’ beneﬁ ts, 
for instance, they have a “handicraft club” to teach participants having more skills, producing some 
products, and earning some money for a side-line job. Whereas some off-duty staff members could 
set up booths at the hospital to sell their goods.
Management Styles
The organization chart is a horizontal-oriented. They do not have several lines of 
commanders in order to have rapidness and ﬂ exibility in management and making decisions. 
Hierarchy is one of the obstacles in organizational management. According to Kettley (1995) 
explicates the components of human resource management strategy which typically accompany 
the move to a ﬂ atter structure are: 1) a greater emphasis upon team working; 2) cross functional 
working; and 3) employee involvement or empowerment. At the Samrong General Hospital, everyone 
can come and talk to the Managing Director directly.
One-minute meeting every morning is one of their strategies to implement in the hospital. 
Only the urgent issues or updated information will be reported to the Managing Director.  
Thirty-minute meeting will have every week for each department and One-hour monthly meeting 
is for the management team. Every six months, they will hold an executive meeting for a few days 
to examine, analyze, and plan ahead for hospital’s directions (Wongphaet, 2011). 
Managing people is the ﬁ rst priority to do before managing tasks, therefore, they emphasize 
on souls and minds of their employees by applying the Buddhism into their working environment. 
SHA (Wongphaet, 2011) stands for Sustainable Health Care and Health Promotion by Appreciation 
and Accreditation that the management team has designed for its work. Furthermore, they encourage 
their employees to create the learning organization, and to understand life and working approach by 
applying consciousness, supporting concentration, and implementing their wisdom to solve problems 
acquiring beneﬁ ts for all. 
Once they face with problems or obstacles, they will communicate and search for causes. 
After that they will analyze, adjust, and correct them. Back to 2006, Ms. Nijjanpansri (2011), 
the Human Resource (HR) Manager expressed that the HR department had surveyed and found out 
that more than 90% of their staff indicated that they were happy in their lives and working with 
this organization. These happiness indexes showed for 5 years consecutively. With the effort of HR 
department, they were working on the survey again, but on the other hand they were looking for the 
hardship of their employees and ﬁ nally they came up with the problem of their debts. Hence, they 
34
Conference
set up “The Samrong General Hospital Saving Cooperative Limited” to solve ﬁ nancial situations of 
their employees. It was a good example that they managed and tried to please their staff. 
Projects/Activities
The organization has provided several projects/activities for their staff members to support 
them working happily. Most of them are base on the Buddhist principles as follows:
1.  Internal Projects/Activities
• “Inexpensive Lunch Project” has been operating about 10 years ago. It costs only Baht 
5 per meal. This program helps employees to save their money on living. In reality 
some staff quit from this hospital, then they came back again because of this program 
since they could save more money if they work here. For instance they have 3 meals/
day, it will be only Baht 15.
• “Half-price Rental Apartment” provides for employees who have a salary less than 
Baht 10,000 which means employees pay for the rental charge only 50% and another 
50% will be paid by the hospital. And another good advantage for this program is 
that they can only walk from their residency to the workplace, then they can save for 
the transportation charges as well.
• “Half-price Shoes” is another project that the ﬁ rm would like to give more bene ﬁ ts to 
staff members, so they pay only a half price of their shoes and the hospital pay the rest 
for them.
• “Free 3 Uniforms” for one year and a half to their employees. Some companies give 
2 uniforms to their staff every year but this idea is more reasonable. Since Thai people 
rarely use the dryer machine, once their uniforms get wet, then they will get troubles 
with the shortage of their uniforms.
• “Scholarship” for employees and their children which is no obligations and conditions. 
More than 20 years ago, the founders had a broad vision by sending their employees to 
study at a master’s level. All of them still have been working for the hospital until now.
• “Making Merits” on a monthly basis for ones who were born in each month operated by 
the HR department. The activities include making donation (Danā), praying, listening 
to Dhamma sermons, and meditation. This is to emphasize that their career is a merit 
making one which they will receive good things from their good deeds every day and 
to assure them to be proud of themselves. It is such a good activity and help participants 
feel happy and get a chance to do good deeds together on their special occasions.
• “Practice Dhamma and Meditation” on the ﬁ rst day of every month. According to they will 
have new employees start working on that day. This is kind of a Dhamma orientation 
for them as well, in the mean time other staff members can attend this program and will 
not count as absentees.
• “Dhamma Retreat” will provide for supervisors, leaders, and ones who are interested 
in Dhamma practices. This program will arrange for 7 days with the Young Buddhist 
Association Under Royal Patronage in Pathum Thani province, and will not count as 
absentees. The corporate will provide a ride and support all expenses for attendants.
35
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
• “Retirement Plan” for staff members who are going to retire, Mr. Wongphaet will give 
them suggestions and plan for their future. Some want to extend working, while someone 
want to further their study to be an instructor. They will get support from the organization.
2. External Projects/Activities
• “Health Education” is to promote how to take care of good health to the community in 
Samrong District.
• “Free Physical Check-up” to nearby community and policemen in that area.
• “Anti-Drugs” is a program that the Samrong General Hospital provides for  schools and 
community and gives knowledge on drugs in order to prevent them from drugs and to 
help addicts stop taking drugs. The Samrong General Hospital is a “White Hospital” 
in Samut Prakan province as well.
• “Samrong Ruamjai Foundation” was established in 1983 and has been helping 
the needy since then.
• “Scholarship” to youths on the Children’s day and other occasions in community around 
Samut Prakan area and also donating book supplies and stationery to schools.
• “Mobile Blood Donation” 
• “V ocation Education” is a teaching program to housewives to learn how to develop 
themselves and improve their skills to earn more money.
Spiritual Environment and Development
With their objectives to be “A giver” to their employees and community, it was explicit 
that the founders and top executive management have been performing this scheme since then. 
They would like to help miserable patients to be happy, and in case they could not help and they 
would be dead, they desire to help them to be rest in peace. And the patient’s relatives feel good that 
the hospital gives a good treatment. Moreover, the staff on Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of the Samrong 
General Hospital was trained to know-how of giving good suggestions and taking care of patients 
who are going to pass away, comforting them to be calm down, also inviting the Buddhist monks 
to preach them and pray for them.
On the back of employees’ identi ﬁ cation card (ID), there are 6 declarations: 1) Be loyal 
to the organization; 2) Be nice to all patients; 3) Love and honor all co-workers like a “Samrong 
Family”; 4) Follow the rules and regulations of organization; 5) Be diligent, honest, and responsible; 
and 6) improve oneself to develop the corporate. Thus, this is a statement that will remind all of staff 
members to perform good deeds everyday when they put on their ID.
Besides, the HR department showed the movie “ Departures” to staff members. It was 
a Japanese movie which won the academy award winner for best foreign language ﬁ lm in the U.S. 
and received 10 Japan academy prize awards in 2009. It was about an encof ﬁ neer who performed 
his duties with his heart and devoted all his effort to decorate corpses beautifully. The main idea 
36
Conference
from this movie was that although they were dead, but he prepared the dead bodies be ready for 
the cremation. He did not behave in a bad manner or neglect to them; in the mean time the staff 
members are in charge of persons who are still alive. After watching this ﬁ lm, most of employees 
got in tears and made a resolution to take a good care of their patients. It was very touching and 
useful to cultivate senses of morality by this method (Nijjanpansri, 2011).
In addition, the HR department provides a basic course for their new employees training them 
to be good helpers with their pride such as one staff member working in a service aid department for 
3 years, Mr. Wongsutal (2011) pointed out that “I’m very proud of my job to help patients and save 
their lives. I’m doing like “a giver” and I give help to everyone without any prejudice, unfairness, 
and discrimination. And I never expected to get anything back from them.” Before working here, 
he had experienced as a salesman, chef, and clerk in various places. Finally he decided to follow 
his father who has been working with this hospital for 18 years and he said that he is happy every 
day and he does not want to change to other jobs or even change to another department in this ﬁ rm 
because at his point only 3 minutes he can save others’ lives. Thus, it is very important for him to 
do so. Once he helps these people, he feels happy within. During the interview, he always had a big 
smile on his face and his eyes.
The persons who give out with their pure intention will get good things in return. It was 
proved by Mr. Wongsutal (2011) that his patients always come back to visit him and buy some snacks 
for him treating like he is their child or relative. One kind of situations that happens quite often is 
that he has free meals because the food owners in that area do not charge it. They told him that he 
took a good care of them when they were in the hospital.
Not only the aspects from their patients, but also the warm feeling from their employees 
will be the happiness index that indicates how working environment of this ﬁ rm would be. 
Ms. Suwannawin (2011) addressed her feeling that she is eager to work every day, with her 18 
year-experiences. During her weekends, she is looking for Mondays to go to work. She feels like this 
is her family. Similarly, Mr. Wongsutal (2011) said that “We spend time working here more than we 
are at home, so I feel like this in my second home. We are brothers and sisters. Everybody gives hands 
to help each other. We are happy here.” Additionally, Ms. Kongpreecha (2011) added that “Working 
at this hospital for 30 years, it likes a love-bondage and makes me feel that this organization is more 
than my house.” Further, Ms. Roadduang (2011) impressed on organizational culture that everyone 
greets and bows to each other both in the morning and in the evening. She feels like being in a warm 
family. The corporate also gives a chance for employees to study and practice Dhamma. Hence, they 
could calm down their minds, and have more consciousness (Onanong, 2011; Roadduang, 2011).
Likewise, Ms. Onanong (2011) explained to her subordinates that “We are so lucky to have 
a good boss who is generous to us and to our patients so we have to do our best for our hospital.” 
In addition, she also shares Dhamma teachings with her patients and patients’ relatives by praying 
and meditating with them (Seangtharathip, 2011; Onanong, 2011). Correspondingly, Ms. Wongsiri-
nopakun (2011) indicated that her department always sponsor for the Dhamma books providing for 
patients free of charge. This method helps her staff to read more Dhamma teaching as well. Once 
the staff members have Dhamma inside their minds and they practice in everyday life, then they can 
serve patients with fully service-minded which come out of their pure intentions as Swanson and 
Holton (2001) cited that the HR professionals use a tool for the bene ﬁ ts of the organization. With 
this method, however, it is beneﬁ cial to both employees and the corporate.
37
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
From the internal projects such as the “Inexpensive Lunch Project” and “Monthly Making 
Merits” providing for their employees, the HR department has extended these 2 programs to be 
successful in 2011 as following:
1. “Full of Merits” is the project that supports any staff members who practice 3-minute 
meditation in each department every day. They can do it 3 times a day:  morning, noon, 
and afternoon. Once one does it, he or she will receive a “meal coupon” amounting 
Baht 5. Then they will get meal for free and if they practice meditation 3 times/day, 
totally they will have 3 coupons. It means they can save their money in each day. Ms. 
Nijjanpansri (2011) and the HR department emphasize this project by following up to 
each department and taking pictures of these activities and post on the board. It was 
a good encouragement.
At ﬁ rst, some departments could not make it, for example the ICU section, 
thus they take turn to do so (Seangtharathip, 2011); the security guard section has no 
place to meditate, then they just sit on the ﬂ oor in front of the Chinese spirit house next 
to the hospital (Nijjanpansri, 2011); for the service aid section, they have to be ready 
to serve patients all the time, as a result they have a standing-meditation for 3 minutes 
after 1-minute morning meeting (Wongsutal, 2011). Whereas at the beginning some 
departments get against from young members, however the head of that department 
encourage them to try and later on they could meditate longer starting from 3 minutes 
to 5 minutes and up to 10 minutes which they themselves ask for it (Laiyangkurn, 2011; 
Seangtharathip, 2011). 
For the back ofﬁ ce staff members, they get together at 7:45 am at the conference 
room on the 7 th ﬂ oor to do the morning chanting and meditation from Mondays to 
Fridays every week (Charoenchai, 2011; Laiyangkurn, 2011). From the record of HR 
department, it showed that the numbers of coupons is increasing originating from 
3,440 coupons in April to 4,364 coupons in May and up to 4,752 coupons in June 2011 
(Nijjanpansri, 2011).
This program is very successful that each department could gain more 
“free meal” coupons and they have a “coupon box” in each department, whenever anyone 
get a coupon, he or she will drop it in that box to share to others. And the one who needs 
to get a meal, he or she will draw one coupon from the box. Some departments use 
these coupons to buy some special foods to eat together occasionally. During the focus 
group interview, some departments realized that the service aid staff members really 
need to have more meal coupons, so they will share to them later on. (Kongpreecha, 
2011; Laiyangkurn, 2011; Nijjanpansri, 2011). 
2. “Monthly Making Merits” started from the HR Manager. She thought that in the previous 
year, employees learned how to receive from others on their birthdays such as getting 
a birthday gift from the HR department, receiving blessing and Dhamma sermon from 
the monks. Hence, in this year she would like them to be “a giver” instead (Nijjanpansri, 
2011).
This project will be held on the forth Friday of every month for everyone who 
is interested in making merits not only for the birthday people. They will meditate and 
38
Conference
listen to Dhamma sermons from Buddhist monks. Further, the alms offering will be 
prepared by the donors. This is the more advanced stage that they have cultivated to 
their employees’ minds. Mr. Wongphaet (2011) stated that our lifetime is very short, we 
should have a clear objective in our life. To purify our minds is a good thing to do so 
and our minds today should be better and purer than yesterday. This is kind of a spiritual 
development in our everyday life (Phrarajabhavanavisudh, 2004). 
5. Discussion and Conclusion
The Samrong General Hospital applies both approaches: the Buddhist principles, and 
the Innovative management approaches in managing their human resources as below:
1. The Buddhist principles: basically they base on Buddhist principles since the beginning 
as the statement of Phradharmakosajarn  expressed in the 30 years of the Samrong 
General Hospital book (2011) that “The Wongphaet family has been supporting Wat 
Prayurawongsawas Waraviharn before 1957. This family is aware of the importance 
of Buddhism. It is noticed that they all support and take good care of Buddhist monks 
and laypeople. Besides, they bring Buddhist doctrines and implement them by inviting 
monks to give monthly Dhamma lecture to their employees. In addition, they also 
promote staff members to make donation, take ﬁ ve precepts, and meditate in order to 
develop their quality of life. It is such a good work to create a peaceful world.” It would 
claim that this corporate has truly built a “Buddhist Social Work” in their workplace.
From observation, the researcher found out that the most conspicuous of 
Buddhist principles that is applies in this ﬁ rm was Mettā or loving-kindness. The teaching 
of Phramongkolthepmuni (Mata, 2010) clari ﬁ ed about the powerful of Mettā that 
everyone can do it. We all have loving-kindness to others as if mothers love their children, 
in other word, we will get tremendous of loving-kindness in return. For the Samrong 
General Hospital, starting from the founders passed along to the second generation, 
the Managing Director. One of the interviewees showed her impression of the top 
management level by giving a case of one staff members who got pregnant and found 
out that her child had a thalassemia. Once Mr. Wongphaet had known about this is-
sue, he told her not to get an abortion and he would support all treatment expenses. As 
a result, that child is still alive until now.
Particularly, Mettā from the Managing Director, there were two more witnesses, 
Ms. Charoenchai (2011) and Ms. Laiyangkurn (2011) who felt very impressed and 
appreciated in his mercy and support both verbally and performingly. Ms. Charoenchai 
got a breast cancer, brain tumor, and thyroid but she used Dhamma and medical treatment 
to heal her symptoms. Sometimes, she felt suffered but Mr. Wongphaet gave her 
warmed words, cheered her up, and concerned about her health. This was the same as 
Ms. Laiyangkurn who also got a brain tumor. At this present, both of them are normal. 
They can work regularly and also give Dhamma talks to the sufferers by showing their 
cases to them.
From the employees’ impression, it presented that leadership is truly vital in 
each organization especially the leaders who have morality in their minds and apply 
5. Discussion and Conclusion
39
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
to management policy. Moreover, leaders handle and organizes thing with their ethical 
thinking, then come out through their speeches, and ﬁ nally transit into their actions. 
Subordinates could perceive and touch by their hearts as well (Krigchak, 2011; Onanong, 
2011; Suwannawin, 2011; Wongsirinopakun, 2011).
2. The HR management approaches: according to Stone (2009), he indicates how to manage 
human resources especially on-the-job experience which starts from:
2.1 Coaching is planned one-to-one instruction. The coach sets a good example of 
what is to be done.
2.2 Mentoring involves the creation of a learning relationship with the mentor acting 
as a coach and role model.
2.3 Behavior Modeling  or observational learning is how people learn from others’ 
experience.
As the above method, the Samrong General Hospital always follows this step by step and 
also showed in its policy.
3. Another perspective from Mr. Wongphaet (2011)  was a linkage between the Plan-Do-
Check-Act cycle (PDCA) or the Deming Wheel which is used for the quality management 
approach (Anonymous, Mind Tools) and Iddhipāda 4. Additionally, the HR department 
implemented this approach in its practices, analyzing from several programs and 
activities. The four-step in the PDCA clariﬁ es as follows: 
4. Plan: Identifying and analyzing the problem.
5. Do: Developing and testing a potential solution.
6. Check: Measuring how effective the test solution was, and analyzing whether it could 
be improved in any way.
7. Act: Implementing the improved solution fully. 
40
Conference
These are shown in Figure 1 below.
Figure 1: The Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle
8. Since the Samrong General Hospital is a service ﬁ rm in the healthcare business, 
due to the ﬁ ve dimensions of service quality or “Servqual” which measures the service 
quality in various service organizations (Looy, Gemmel, & Dierdonck, 2003), 
the researcher analyzed from their practices from Buddhist doctrines such as Iddhipada 
4 and Brahmavihāra 4 related to the ﬁ ve factors of Servqual as following:
8.1 Tangibles – the appearance of physical facilities which provides for services and 
communication material. In this case, this year they just renovated the emergency 
room for this purpose because their location is in the industry zone and vocational 
schools, most of their patients get an accident or are injured. Moreover, they also 
decorated new rooms for inpatients feeling comfortably like in their home.
8.2 Reliability – consistency of performance and dependability. This framework was 
approved by the Marketing, and Accounting and Finance department that assured 
on the “transparency” policy.
8.3 Responsiveness – the willingness to help customers, prompt service. One example 
was staff members both the front-of ﬁ ce and the back-of ﬁ ce who keenly offered 
help to patients and the researcher. During the walk around the hospital, sometimes 
the employees asked for a permission to stop walking and greeted to their familiar 
clients.
8.4 Assurance – knowledge and courtesy of employees and their ability to inspire trust 
and conﬁ dence. The researcher could afﬁ rm on their politeness from her observation.
8.5 Empathy – caring, individualized attention to customers. This was implanted and 
cultivated to their employees since they ﬁ rst entered to this corporate and emphasize 
to them regularly by training courses and everyday working life.

41
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
However, as Looy et al (2003) stated about three different models of human resources 
management: the Michigan model, the Harvard model, and the Warwick model in terms of deﬁ ning 
what needs to be done, and summarizing what is best for one company will not necessarily be best 
for another. That perhaps concludes into the criteria on Buddhist social work in each organization, 
yet it still depends on several factors which the top management team must integrate in terms of its 
context and practices base on human resources who play a crucial role in the healthcare business.
Nevertheless, one main factor that the Samrong General Hospital could create and maintain 
its Buddhist social work environment like this because the top executive level realize how its 
efﬁ ciency and potential to do so, with a certain number of employees. In the case of expanding business, 
they prefer not to do it at this present. The one who succeeds in one’s life, he or she should know 
oneself thoroughly.
Notwithstanding, at this moment the Samrong General Hospital has reached its goal at some 
levels, but with the faith that “Today is better than yesterday, and tomorrow will be better than today.” 
The researcher truly believes that they are on their way to still serve community and employees 
with their wholehearted basing on Buddhism principles. According to the research, Anson (2000) 
and Vestal et al (1997) identiﬁ ed that HR’s role is critical in building an adaptive, learning culture 
with the capacity for rapid change by creating right values and behaviors in healthcare workers. 
In this research, the HR department of this ﬁ rm was one of the good role models to demonstrate that 
they truly cultivate ethics and morality to their staff employees including increase the better way of 
their lives. The researcher also agreed that the Samrong General Hospital is on the right track to its 
target by creating a Buddhist social work and “warm” atmosphere in its workplace.
42
Conference
References:
Anonymous. (n.d.). Mahayana Hinayana Buddhism. Retrieved September 29, 2011, from I Love 
India: http://festivals.iloveindia.com/buddha-purnima/mahayana-hinayana.html
Anonymous. (n.d.). Mind Tools. Retrieved September 27, 2011, from Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) 
Implementing New Ideas in a Controlled Way: http://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/
newPPM_89.htm
Anonymous. (2004). Palungjit. Retrieved September 27, 2011, from Brahmavih āra 4 Part 1: 
http://www.palungjit.com/smati/books/index.php?cat=142
Anonymous. (2007, March 3). Religion Facts. Retrieved September 29, 2011, from Buddhist Sects, 
Schools & Denominations: http://www.religionfacts.com/buddhism/sects.htm
Anson, B. (2000). Taking Charge of Change in a V olatile Healthcare Marketplace. Human Resource 
Planning, V olume 23, Issue 4, 21-33.
Bhikkhu, B. (1957). Iddhipāda 4. Retrieved September 26, 2011, from Buddhadasa:  
http://www.buddhadasa.com/rightstudydham/itibath4.html
Brummans, B., & Hwang, J. (2010). Tzu Chi’s Organizing for a Compassionate World: Insights 
into the Communicative Praxis of a Buddhist Organization. Journal of International and 
Intercultural Communication, V olume 3, Issue 2, May , 136-163.
Cittasobhano, P. (1982). Buddhism and Thai Culture. Bangkok: International Buddhist Students 
Association Annual Magazine .
Kettley, P. (1995, July). Is Flatter Better? Delayering the Management Hierarchy. Retrieved 
September 26, 2011, from Institute for Employment Studies:  
http://www.employment-studies.co.uk/pubs/summary.php?id=290
Looy, B. V ., Gemmel, P., & Dierdonck, R. V . (2003). Services Management an Integrated Approach 
(Second Edition). Harlow: Pearson Education Limited.
Lovichakorntikul, P., & Walsh, J. (2011). Buddhist Principles for Human Resource Development 
Professionals in the Healthcare Business in Thailand. Res Manageria V olume 2 Issue 2, 1-9.
Mata. (2010). The Teaching of Luang Pu in the Contemporary World (คําสอนหลวงปู่สู่โลกปัจจุบัน), Second 
Edition. Bangkok: O.S. Printing House.
Phrarajabhavanavisudh. (2004). Dhamma for Laypeople (The Blessing Life) No. 6, First Edition. 
Bangkok: Rungsilp Printing (1997).
Phra Dhammapiṭaka, P. (2003). Dictionary of Buddhism. Bangkok: Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya 
University.
Stone, R. J. (2009). Managing Human Resources: an Asian Perspective, First Edition. Singapore: 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.
References:
43
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Swanson, R., & Holton III, E. (2001). Foundations of Human Resource Development . San Francisco: 
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
Thanissaro Bhikkhu, G. D. (2011, March 8). The Healing Power of the Precepts. Retrieved 
September 26, 2011, from Access to Insight: http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/
thanissaro/precepts.html
Vestal, K., Fralicx, R., & Spreier, S. (1997). Organizational Culture: the critical link between 
strategy and results. Hospital and Health Services Administration, V olume 42, Issue 3, 
339-365.
Wongphaet, S. (2011). The 30 Years of the Samrong General Hospital. Bangkok: Giant Point.
44
Role of Religion in the Rehabilitation of Off enders
Ms. E.A.D. Anusha Edirisinghe 
Dept. of Sociology  
University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka
 A.P . Gu nathilake
Chief Jailor, Remand Prison
Trinkomalee, Sri Lanka
Introduction 
As crime prevention and control of the re-imprisonment of offenders is a serious problem 
in Sri Lanka. In analyzing the number of convicted and un-convicted prisoners through the statistics 
of the Prison Department, Sri Lanka those show that there are different tendency patterns. Majority 
come from urban areas and relationship between education and criminal behavior. The following 
table shows the number of prison inmates from 2002 to 2010.
Table 1: The number of convicted and un-convicted Prisoners1
Year 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Convicted 25023 27681 26898 33034 28732 31306 33566 37872 32128
Unconvicted 82187 88535 87456 96007 89190 99513 102245 108868 100491
Total 107210 116216 114354 129041 117922 130819 135811 146740 132619
There is an intolerable congestion in Sri Lankan Prisons due to the large number of convicted 
and un-convicted male and female prisoners are held together. This fact itself creates a lot of problems 
as they are to socialize back after the judgment is served. Some have to serve the sentence in short 
period whereas the rest have longer durations. Especially when selecting the convicted prisoners 
for rehabilitation the prison authorities have to face a lot of problems. Imprisonment has not been 
an effective way of controlling or preventing crimes. 
To rehabilitate the offenders there are numerous programs. The researchers found out that 
the religious rehabilitation proved to be very effective than the vocational rehabilitation. Even though 
the rehabilitation programs are conducted, the prison authorities revealed that there is a tendency 
of ﬁ fty percent [50%] of inmates getting re-imprisoned.2 It is an indication that the effectiveness of 
the rehabilitation programs is very low.
1  Department of Prison Statistics, 2007, p.13- 45;  www.prisons.gov.lk,09.10 2011
2  Kodippili P.W,12.09.2011
Introduction
45
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
This study was organized and conducted to have a scientiﬁ c understanding of religion based 
rehabilitation of prisoners in a selected prison in Sri Lanka. Bogambara  prison  located  in Kandy , 
Sri Lanka was selected  prison in and the annual  meditation  program  conducted  to sort term 
convicted  prisoners and long  term convicted  prisoners. It has supported to rehabilitation of prison 
jailed or capital punishment and other serious crimes. Vipasshana Bahavana was annually practiced 
for ten days and over 100 inmates were participated it. This study mainly concerned ten days 
meditation programs and other religious activities inside and outside of the prison. These programs 
were really supported their behavioral changes of inmates.
Methodology of the Study
The research area is a closed, main prison at Bogambara, Kandy, Sri Lanka. Convicted 
prisoners higher than the un-convicted prisoners in the Bogambara prison. There are more than 
2000 convicted prisoners and 700 un-convicted prisoners in Bogambara prison. Purposive Sample 
40 inmates were selected for data gathering in section of “G” ward. G ward was selected for 
the sample most of inmates representative ten days meditation program. The tools of in-depth 
interview and observation methods were applied to gather data for this study. Data gathered through 
those techniques were   properly processed and analyzed to understanding the nature of   the role 
the religion in rehabilitation of offenders.   
Limitation of the Research 
Limitations of the research were that only the offenders were selected because only they 
are selected for the rehabilitation program. Those who are serving death penalty were also selected. 
The collection of data from all prisoners was difﬁ cult but it was understood that there is a tendency 
for the religious rehabilitation program by those prisoners who serve long-term sentences and death 
penalty. Since the others are selected for many other rehabilitation programs   they were not considered.
Personal   Information of the Respondents 
In this research there were both married and unmarried respondents. Out of the forty 
respondents thirty seven [37] were married and the rest were unmarried. 
Table 2: Marital Status of the Respondents
No. of  inmates Married % Unmarried %
37 92.5 03 7.5 
Those who are married are the head of the households in their families. As they get imprisoned 
there is certain negative effects work on their families. Therefore, it is of great importance that they 
should be rehabilitated soon before they get back to the society. The age group of the majority of 
the offenders was between  41-50 [52.50%]. There were 27.50% who are between the ages 30 to 
Limitation of the Research 
Methodology of the Study
Personal   Information of the Respondents 
46
Conference
40 years of age. Another 20% was those who are over 50 years of age. Within this group there are 
many who were convicted for grave crimes of rape and murder. 
The level of education was also an important element in evaluating the anti-social behavior 
of the offenders and planning the rehabilitation programs. There were thirteen [32.50%] inmates 
who did not have the literacy capability at all. There are another twenty three [57.50%] who had 
studied up to GCE O/L and they had some literacy capabilities. Those who did not have literacy 
got the religious knowledge from those who have the literacy and there were certain attempts to 
get the younger inmates into these religious programs with the support of the leaders who represent 
the older generation. All the respondents were Sinhalese Buddhists and the observations and interviews 
aimed at the Buddhist religious rehabilitation programs. 
The Need for Rehabilitation 
Since inception the Prison authorities have understood the value and the importance of 
a correction process for both minor and major offenders. Rehabilitation has been conducted in various 
ways within the prison system and the religious aspect of rehabilitation is given a priority. V ocational 
rehabilitation helps the inmate to have a better future economic security by learning a speciﬁ c skill 
that he or she can utilize in the world of work as the inmate is released. The religious rehabilitation 
conditions the mind of the inmate by achieving self-control in many ways. The change of behavior 
in general inmates and the conditioning of the mindset of the inmates who have received a death 
sentence are the basic objectives of religious rehabilitation.
When an individual gets imprisoned he loses his identity, in many ways. First, he loses his 
name instead he is given a number in the prison. Second, he loses his intimate relationships with 
family members, kith and kin. Further to a great extent he loses most of his basic human rights like 
freedom. In a social setting he or she has to face labeling and social stigmatization which could 
have greater effects even after his release as a convict or innocent non-convict. During the time 
the inmate stays at prison the prison authorities try to counter all these negative effects that could 
affect the character of the prisoner. 
Figure 1: Model of   Rehabilitation
Society        Society 
       Loss of his/her name            Home leave/Work release program  
      Loss of family relationship               Community based rehabilitation 
      Loss of  peer group relationship      Religious activities  
                    Vocational  rehabilitation                                                          Involving rehabilitation programs  
             at the prison 
                                Loss of freedom 
 
Labeled as a criminal 
The Need for Rehabilitation 
47
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
It is believed that in any rehabilitation process there should be a process that helps 
the individual to develop his self-conﬁ dence back and the increase of social recognition. Further it 
should be able to inculcate new set of values top the inmate and develop the ability to foster social 
relationships. The main objective behind the rehabilitation process in the prison is to integrate 
the individual back into the society as he or she was before. It should not make him feel that he is 
an unwanted or a different individual even after this rehabilitation process3. 
The religious programs conducted in the prison aimed at convincing the inmate the wrong 
act he or she has committed and to rebuild his or her life by understanding the failure or failures 
in his decision making process that led to the imprisonment. In the research it was understood that 
the religious programs facilitated in developing the personality of the inmates. Through the initial 
interviews the researcher could ﬁ nd out that the inmates have developed anger against the society 
at the initial phase of conviction. All inmates in the sample revealed that they were suffering from 
a psychological trauma. To counter all these psychological conditions the religious programs were of 
immense help to the inmates. During the data collection process the researchers received a ﬁ rsthand 
experience of the value of the religious program conducted at the Bogambara prison in inculcating 
self-control to improve self-discipline. 
Religious Programs on Rehabilitation:
Vipassana Meditation Program
Meditation is a system of mind cultivation or mental training literally meanings mental 
development. It is mental activity and eradicating woe and sorrowful situation. Another bene ﬁ t of 
meditation is not getting perturbed in the day today life, resulting overcome mental problems and 
reduce the risk of developing some physical illness such as heart attack, blood pressure. Direct approach 
to the path leading to the liberation and correct understanding mind and body.  According to Buddhism 
there are three basic principles of Meditation namely Seclusion (Viveka):
• Kaya Viveka (Liberation of the body feeling)
• Citta Viveka (Liberation of the mind from negative situation)
• Upadhi Viveka (complete liberation of the mind from normal activities the mind 
experience)4
Vipassana means to see things as they really are, not only as they seem to be. The technique 
of Vipassana is based on the Sathipatthana Sutha. Sathipatthana means the establishing of 
mindfulness.5 According to the psychologists the proper practice and application of meditation 
enables one to solve many problems. Vipassana mediation. It is treatment for physical and mental 
ailments it is similar to using a certain medicine for a particular disease.
Vipassana is an art of living. It is technique of self – observation, truth observation and 
self-exploration by oneself only. Vipassna frees the individual from all the negativities of Mind such as 
3  Karunathilake k, 1991,131 
4 .Gammanpila M, 2008,p.69
5  Ahir  D.C,1999,p.09
Religious Programs on Rehabilitation:
48
Conference
anger, greed, and ignorance. It leads happiness, liberation and full enlightenment.6 Therefore 
a Vipassana meditation directs to change behavior of the prisoners.
Vipassana meditation program is an annual program conducted formally at the Bogambara 
prison in Kandy, Sri Lanka. The ten day Vipassana Bhavana [meditation] program is conducted by 
the Dhammakuta Meditation Center at Hindagala, Peradeniya and the ﬁ rst three days are reserved 
for the Anapanasati Bhavana.7
Anapanasati is a very important practice to all, in order to develop concentration. 
Anapanasati meditation supports cultivation of the mind in order to acquire peace and happiness 
during all times of the day.8 It is very important to buildup peaceful environment in the prison.  
All those who have joined this program said that during these three days they found it very difﬁ cult 
and it was both physical and mental training. Further they told that the initial uncomfortable nature 
began to reduce regularly from the fourth day onwards. From fourth day onwards they have to 
practice Vipassana Bhavana and the last day is reserved for Maithree bhavana. That is the day of 
Metta. During the ﬁ rst nine days the participants cannot talk to each other and the last day they are 
allowed to do so. On the last day they are allowed to spend the day with their family members also. 
The environment for the entire program was arranged by the prison authorities themselves. There is 
a speciﬁ c diet selected for the entire ten days. Twelve instructors from the Dhammakuta Meditation 
Center at Hindagala, Peradeniya,Sri Lanka arrived at the prison and the inmates can get the help 
from them. All the participant inmates are allowed to talk to them only. The meditation program 
commenced each day at 4.30 am and concludes at 9.30 pm. Every hour ten minutes break was given 
and during that time all the problems or inconveniences of the participants can be informed to 
the conductors of the meditation program. It was aimed at changing the behavior of the participants 
by following a regular pattern during the entire time period. 
The inmates who participated in this program confessed that it gave them effective results 
in getting their behavior changed. Rather than being a part of any other rehabilitation program this 
speciﬁ c Vipassana Bhavana program gives a better mental and moral training to the participants. 
Out of the sample 31 inmates [77.50%] were directly engaged in this program. The rest 
[22.50%] did not have the opportunity to join the same due to the demand it has but they are following 
the same under the guidance of those who are privileged to participate in it. The Senior Welfare ofﬁ cer 
of the Bogambara prison in Kandy, Sri Lanka explained the researchers that a large number of 
inmates apply for the program but due to the limited space and the resources it has the authorities 
have to limit the intake to one hundred participants. During data collection it was found out that all 
the respondents too have applied for the program. 
According to the responses of the inmates the researcher could formulate an idea of 
the nature of the program. Out of 31 respondents [26%] said that they have taken part in the same 
four times. Eight respondents 08 [26%] of inmates have participated in either two or three times. 
Only ﬁ fteen inmates [48%] have participated in it once. According to the responses the researchers 
could understand that there is a tendency to participate the program repeatedly. Further it was found 
out that there has been a behavioral change of those who have taken part in that. The respondent 
‘I’ who had the opportunity to participate in the program mentioned that: 
6  Shah S,1999,p.101
7  www.dhamma.org,06.10.2011
8   Wijetillake  D.G.,2004,p.60
49
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
“I have done something evil knowingly or unknowingly. I corrected myself and got to know 
where I have gone wrong. Religion helped me a lot in that. At the initial days at prison 
I was totally helpless”9    
The response given by the inmate ‘III’ too is vital in understanding the changes taken place 
in behavior. 
‘I was very angry as I was imprisoned. I did not do anything wrong. I envied the lawyers. 
But a good friend met at the prison changed everything. He introduced me into meditation 
and meditation has changed my life a lot now’10
He has served as a police of ﬁ cer and convicted for death penalty charging the murders of 
a Professor of a higher educational institute and his wife. When he was on leave at home he had heard 
these two murders and has gone to report it. Allegations have been leveled against him for being 
in the place where the murders have committed. It was informed to the researchers by the prison 
authorities that he has changed his unruly behavior shown at the beginning to a highly disciplined 
form of life at prison now. The inmate ‘III’ too was in the opinion that the meditation process has 
a signiﬁ cant inﬂ uence on his life in general and behavior in particular.  The inmate ‘IV’ summarized 
in a few words the effect of the program. 
‘I got maximum use out of what the prison gave me, that was the Vipassana bhávana, means 
meditation’.11  
Majority of respondents who have followed the Vipassana meditation program had been 
doing well and were extremely helping the day-to-day activities of the prison. 
Those who serve the death penalty have come to the conclusion that they have no 
opportunity to get back into the mainstream society again. Therefore, to reduce the psychological 
trauma generated out of that condition religion is the only alternative mean. Religion helps to rebuild 
his lost mentality and understand the reality of life. So it is proved that the religious rehabilitation 
programs would bring remarkably effective results on those who are convicted. Those who have 
got the opportunity to participate in this Vipassana Bhavana program had added that into their daily 
routine. 
The number of inmates [29] who practice meditation within the cell is [72.50%]. The rest 
conduct many other religious activities even though they do not practice meditation. Other than 
the main shrine room there is a separate shrine room in each and every building.
Reading Dhamma Texts  
Out of the total number of inmates at Bogambara prison in Kandy, Sri Lanka the majority 
is Buddhists. How they are rehabilitated through religion or how religious programs cater to their 
rehabilitation process was the main objective behind this study. All the respondents [40] who 
participated in the in-depth interviews claimed that they have understood the real nature of religion 
9  Indepth Interviews, 2010
10  Indepth Interviews, 2010
11  Indepth Interview, 2010
Reading Dhamma Texts  
50
Conference
after they enter the prison. Most of them were literate and they have cultivated the same during 
their stay at prison. Most of those who have received death sentence got used to utilize the library to 
a great extent because they are not made a part of any other rehabilitation process. So they have 
used their time to read books. During the time in the library they have read the books written on 
Tipitaka, Abhidhamma and meditation practices by Sri Lankan Buddhist monks and due to this their 
knowledge on religion has got improved remarkably. Since they have got the basic background 
knowledge needed for meditation practices the rehabilitation programs conducted were very much 
facilitated from the part of the inmates. All 40 [100%] respondents acknowledged that their self-control 
was mainly achieved through the knowledge they received from these Buddhist books. 
Chanting Pirith at the Cells
The number of inmates who chant pirith within their own cell is 15 [37.50%]. In Sri Lankan 
society there are lay groups who chant pirith other than Buddhist monks and those who chant pirith 
in the prison act as a lay pirith chanting group. They help the prison authorities in speciﬁ c occasions 
when their services are needed. For example, during the times of the heightened ethno-national 
conﬂ ict this group has engaged in chanting pirith in honor of the soldiers who have been sacriﬁ cing 
their lives for the integrity of the motherland. 
Sila Program 
Buddhists believe that observing Sila helps one to discipline one’s behavior to a great 
extent. Sila controls the mind, body and the word. The researchers understood that the Sila program 
is another successful religious activity conducted at the Bogambara prison to correct the behavior 
of the inmates. Out of those who have received the death sentence there are thirty six [90%] who 
join the Sila program. Generally sort term convicted prisoners, the remanded prisoners to join 
the program. The prison authorities supply all the facilities needed to make this a success. All poya 
day programs commence at 6.30 am and a Buddhist priest from a neighboring temple is invited 
to deliver the sermon. All the inmates get together to participate in this program and they listen to 
and watch the religious programs broadcast on radio channels and telecast on television channels. 
The main Buddhist religious festivals like Vesak and Poson are celebrated with a lot of 
glamour and Sila programs are successfully conducted during these days. Each Vesak poya day 
the President grants freedom to a large number of inmates who serve terms for minor offences. 
So the inmates consider this also as they stay within the prison. Some who have received short-term 
sentences earn for this forgiveness granted each year. The Welfare Unit of the prison informed that 
between two hundred to three hundred inmates take part in this. 
Sila Program 
Chanting Pirith at the Cells
51
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Dhamma School  on Sundays 
In analyzing the prison statistics of those who get imprisoned, it was learnt that there is 
a high tendency to get those who have not attended a school at all and those who have attended only 
up to grade six.12 Simultaneously it was revealed that these inmates have not attended the dhamma 
schools. Therefore, to change the behavior pattern of these inmates there are speciﬁ c programs are 
conducted in Bogambara Prison in Kandy, Sri Lanka. 
It was learnt that most of the inmates who constituted the sample had not attended the Dhamma 
School. A very few respondents like six [15%] had connections with the temple from childhood but 
the rest were not socialized through the temple. But there is a group of nine young inmates who are 
really interested in the Dhamma School and the percentage is [22.50%]. One of them sat the Final 
Examination of the Dhamma School.  The Buddhist priests in the neighboring temples and the lay 
people reside in the area help the prison authorities to continue the Dhamma School. 
Bodhi Pooja Program 
This is one of the programs that the inmates take part regularly. It helps to console 
the mind of the inmate. Out of the sample 28 [70%] participate in this activity. The morning session 
is attended by many inmates rather than the evening session. The cleaning of the area is also done by 
the inmates themselves before they commence the Bodhi pooja. After the Bodhi pooja the inmates 
engage in their regular day-to-day routines.  
Dhamma Sermon on Sundays 
There are some inmates in the sample who have made it a habit to listen to the sermon 
broadcast on radio channels on each Sunday and this number is thirty four [85%]. They commented 
that it helps them immensely to formulate their behavior better. Few of them cited as examples 
the Jataka stories that helped them to understand how to behave in critical situations countering 
the mistakes they tend to commit. So it was revealed that the religious programs were of paramount 
importance in shaping personalities of the inmates by bringing in positive changes. Since they were 
not inculcated with the differences between good and evil and merit and sin during childhood, this 
kind of exposure had been extremely good to change the attitudes, norms, mores and values. As 
they learn these things and internalize the training and the knowledge they receive, those would help 
them as they get back into the mass society. 
12  Prison Statistics of Sri Lanka,2007 
Dhamma Sermon on Sundays 
Bodhi Pooja Program 
Dhamma School  on Sundays 
52
Conference
Given up Bad Habits 
A majority of the respondents [22] in the sample were vegetarians [55%]. Most of them 
have to abstain from smoking and liquor as they have to spend a life in relation to religiosity. But it 
was understood that some inmates use certain illegal means to have drugs within the premises for 
their own consumption. Even though some inmates were unable to move away from the deviant 
behaviors that they have got used to before they were convicted, the prison authorities take a great 
interest in curbing the reach of drugs to the prison premises. The prison authorities believe that at 
the initial stage the inmates too ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to get adjusted to the new situation but as time goes 
on other than a very few most of the adhere to the rules and regulations pertaining to the prison life.
Rituals conducted at the Temple of the Tooth 
The Bogambara prison inmates have the opportunity to engage in the religious activities 
take place at the Temple of the Tooth. The Temple of the Tooth is in a close proximity to the prison. 
People from time immemorial consider that serving the Temple of the Tooth is a meritorious act.  
The prison authorities give an opportunity for the inmates to join the annual August procession of 
the Temple of the Tooth. From one hundred and ﬁ fty to two hundred inmates serve the initial 
preparation workload of the Kandy Esala Perahara. This is a good opportunity for the inmates 
because they are hoping to get back to the mass society. As the general prisoners encounter with 
the other people from time to time they are having an opportunity to mix and work with the others. 
The participation of the ritualistic activities at the four devalas allows the inmates to get their mental 
stress, anxiety and complications reduced.    
Other Religious Activities
The role religion plays in converting the individual to a better social status can be accepted 
without doubt. The inmates in the prison belong to different religions and the prison authorities have 
arranged various religious activities allowing all inmates to take part in the religious programs of 
each and every inmate’s speciﬁ c religion. For the eighty [80] Christian inmates in the prison there are 
speciﬁ c religious programs on Saturdays and Sundays and they are allowed to celebrate Christmas 
with all the glory and the grandeur. 
There are hundred and twenty [120] Hindu inmates and they take part in their respective 
religious activities every day. For them there is a speci ﬁ c Dhamma school also conducted at 
the prison and the arrangements are made by the Welfare Unit of the prison to have the services of 
external visiting teachers who are excelled in the knowledge of Hindu religion. 
Around two hundred [200] Islam inmates too have the opportunity to take part in their 
particular religious activities mainly on Sundays and the other days too. The prison authorities 
have arranged the visit of a religious leader from the main Mosque in Kandy on Fridays to conduct 
special religious praying. Other than that the Islamic inmates are provided with the opportunities to 
celebrate their main religious festivals like Ramalan, Id-Ul-Fitr, and Milad-Un Nabi, The Holy Koran 
Other Religious Activities
Rituals conducted at the Temple of the Tooth 
Given up Bad Habits 
53
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
has given to them for their  religious praying. In this study the main focus is laid on the Buddhist 
inmates at Bogambara prison in Kandy, Sri Lanka
Conclusion and Recommendation
It was found out that the religious rehabilitation programs conducted at the prison had 
a tremendous inﬂ uence in changing the characters and the behaviors of the inmates. The Vipassana 
Bhavana, which is the main religious event in the religious rehabilitation program had greater 
effects on the personality formation of the inmates. Meditation has given them a sense of training 
for self-control and it has helped them to realize the nature or reality of life. Further these religious 
programs have minimized inter-personal con ﬂ icts that could arise at the prison life. All forms of 
sentences; short-term, long-term or even those who have received death penalty too get a kind of 
a consolation from these programs. The steps should be taken to have a formal and systematic 
evaluation of each and every inmate those who get back into the society to verify whether they 
continue the training or the discipline they have received during prison life. 
Conclusion and Recommendation
54
Conference
References 
Ahir D.C.,(1999),” A Universal Buddhist Technique of Meditation, Vipassana, Sri Satguru Publication, 
Delhi, India.
Gammapila M, (2008), The Direct Approach to the path leading to Liberation in Buddhism Basic 
Principles, Theory and Practice, Author Publication, Sri Lanka. 
Karunathilake K, (1991), Crimes,  Child Delinquency and Rehabilitation, Malinga Publisher, 
Kadawatha, Sri Lanka.
Kodippili P.W, Commissioner of General (12.109 2011), Speech on National Prisoners Day, Prison 
of Kegalle, Sri Lanka.
Prison Statistics, (2007), Dept. of Prison Headquarters, Colombo, Sri Lanka
Shah S Pravinchandra,(1999), “Vipassana Meditation And Its Application In social Change 
Vipassana, Sri Satguru Publication, Delhi, India.
Wijetillake D.G, (2004), Buddhist Path to Freedom, Godage International Publication, Sri Lanka.
Websites Visited 
www.dhamma.org.,06.10.2011 &  www.prisons.gov.lk, 09.10.2011.
References
55
An Analytical and Creative Study of theBuddhist Theory 
and Practice of Psycho-therapy
Prof. Sumanapala Galmangoda
Director, Postgraduate Institute of Pali and Buddhist Studies
University of Kelaniya
The teachings of the Buddha1 originally delivered to the people in India in the 6th Century 
B. C. have been further analyzed and interpreted over a long period of time in many countries such 
as Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, China, Korea and Japan. The purpose of this noble endeavour was 
to provide people with a right understanding which is beneﬁ cial for their well-being in this life, life 
here-after and ﬁ nal freedom.
The Buddhist traditions though vary in terms of interpretations commonly accept that 
the mental aspect of human personality plays the most important role in human behavior. According 
to the Buddhist analysis of ﬁ ve grasping groups (pañca-upādānakkhandha)2 mentality is explained 
under four groups and physical aspect represents only one group. The Abhidhammic analysis of 
the ﬁ ve groups ascribes 89 or 121 types of consciousness and 52 psychic functions to the mentality 
in relation to the feelings, perceptions, dispositions and consciousness. The physical or material 
aspect is analyzed into about 14 parts in early Buddhism and its Abhidhammic interpretation into 
28 material elements. Mental and physical aspects though analyzed as two separate groups for 
the sake of easy understanding their mutual inter-dependent nature is emphasized.3 
1  Except otherwise indicated all references refer to the editions of the Pali Text Society, London
2    S. 111., p. 101; D. 111., p. 233; M. 1., P. 190; A. V ., p. 52
3    Sumanapala, G. D., Abhidhammic Interpretations of Early Buddhist Teachings, Singapore, 2005, pp. 12-14

56
Conference
The interdependent process of psycho-physical function of human personality in relation to 
the external world is explained in the early Buddhist discourses as follows:
It should be stated here that the term “Consciousness” occurs two times in the above 
process. It stands for the Pali term “viññ āṇa”, The usage of the term “viññ āṇa” in the discourses 
does not refer to one and the same thing. In the Step I the term refers to the initial mental awareness 
as a response to the contact with external objects of the senses. The term in the Step V refers to 
the self-view or personality view that people construct in their day-to-day life. Without the conﬁ rmation 
of this personality view they cannot survive in the world because the world including human beings 
is subject to constant change. Momentary change of psycho-physical world motivates people to 
establish themselves permanently in the world by means of building up a personality view out of 
their experiences. This is the reason for their existence continuously in the worlds in terms of birth 
and death. The complete stop of this process is called ﬁ nal freedom or liberation in Buddhism.
The same psycho-physical process of human personality is given in a wider context in 
Theravada Abhidhamma as follows:
Step I: stream-consciousness, its vibration due to the contact between senses and 
sense-objects and the breaking of stream-consciousness
Step II: mental awareness arising of particular thoughts regarding the objects in 
relation to one of sense faculties due to the contact of the objects  
Step III: Re ﬂ ection on the sense-objects in terms of accepting, investigation and 
determining the nature of objects
4  Sumanapala, G. D., Early Buddhist Philosophy and Social Concepts, Singapore, 2001, pp. 8-11
Step I -  Physical Body     External Material World  
 the eye    color and shape 
 the ear    sounds 
 t h e  n o s e     s m e l l  
 the tongue    taste 
 the skin    temperature 
 
Step II - Senses              Sense-objects       Consciousness               feelings or sensations 
 
Step III - Feelings               Perceptions or memory  
 
Step IV - Perceptions (memories)             Reflection                dispositions  
(concepts, ideas, beliefs, views, opinions) 
 
Step V - Senses 
 sense-objects                   
 feelings        Personality views 
 perceptions                (Consciousness)      
              reflection                   (self, I-ness, soul)4 
 dispositions 
Consciousness 
(mental awareness) 
57
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Step IV: Mental experience or enjoyment of the sense-objects in terms of rapid succession 
of seven thought-moments
Step V: Registering of the sense-experience in terms of two thought-moments 5
The above mentioned Abhidhammic analysis of psycho-physical process includes seventeen 
thought-moments. The complete process does not occur in regard to all experiences of sense-faculties. 
The moments of thought-process may vary in accordance with the extent of experiences. And 
the mind also as a sense-faculty contacts with mental objects or ideas directly.
This mental process is different from the above to some extent. But this mind-door process 
is very important as far as the Buddhist psycho-therapeutic methods are concerned. Ven. Nyanatiloka 
gives in brief the process as follows:
“The process of the inner, or mind consciousness, i.e. , without participation of the ﬁ ve 
physical senses, is as follows: in case mind-object entering the Mind-door (manodv ārāvajjana), 
the ‘Impulsive Stage’ and the ‘Registering Stage’, before ﬁ nally sinking into the subconscious 
stream”.6 A large number of mental problems in modern society is caused by thinking or reﬂ ecting 
over the concepts created through the sense data. The concepts created through the sense-perception 
process can be identiﬁ ed as mentality, mental concomitants or thoughts explained in Abhidhamma 
as ﬁ fty-two cetasikās. Out of the ﬁ fty-two cetasikās the karmically unwholesome cetasikās become 
the psychological basis for many mental problems.  The 52 cetasikās are analyzed under the following 
categories:
i. Karmically wholesome or neutral:  25
ii. Karmically unwholesome:  14 = 52 7
iii. Karmically neutral:   13
The unwholesome thoughts are mainly related to greed, hatred and delusion. They become 
the basis for innumerable number of mental illnesses. The wholesome thoughts together with relevant 
behavior provide a good ground to get rid of all such problems.
According to early Buddhist teachings human beings possess two mental tendencies by 
birth. Simply they are likes and dislikes. These are mental reactions and they are extremely useful 
and essential for the survival of beings. Further they are not harmful deﬁ lements. But the problems 
arise out of them when they are developed without limits.
The unlimited growth of these two aspects can be given as follows:
Normal level Middle level Final level
likes greed covetousness (discontent)
dislikes1 hate malevolence (desire to injure)
5  Sumanapala, G. D., An Introduction to Therav āda Abhidhamma, Singapore, 1998, 135-137
6  Ven. Nyanatiloka, Buddhist Dictionary, Singapore, 1946. See under Viññ āṇakicca 
7  op. cit., See under Cetasik ā
 
58
Conference
The middle level tendencies are considered as mental disorders or unwholesome mental 
roots and the ﬁ nal ones are treated as unwholesome mental functions. 8 As a result of unlimited 
development of greed and discontent one wishes to get everything that he or she likes. Due to 
the changing nature of the world no one is able to get everything that he or she wishes. Therefore 
as a result of the failure in this regard delusion arises in the mind. On the other hand due to 
the development of hate and malevolence though he or she wishes to keep away everything that 
he or she does not like, this attempt also becomes unsuccessful due to the impermanent nature of 
the world. So the result is same as in the ﬁ rst case. So delusion or mental disorder (confusion) becomes 
a common factor of all unenlightened beings. Hence the Buddhist saying that all ordinary beings 
are like mad people.9 Together with this madness there arises another deﬁ lement called conceit10 in 
the mind as a result of some achievements in those reactions. The delusion and conceit are the basic 
factors of mental disorders. All the mental problems whether they belong to psychosis or neurosis 
can be explained in relation to the above mentioned mental reactions. In brief this is the theory of 
psychotherapy in Buddhism.
Before we turn to the practice of psychotherapy in Buddhism it is not out of context to point 
out some speciﬁ c characteristics that serve as the basis of the therapeutic methods.
i. All psycho-therapeutic methods in Buddhism are directed towards nibb āna extinction 
of all deﬁ lements as the goal. The actual experience of the goal is to give up everything 
in order to make an end to the suffering caused by repeated existence or rebirth. 
The patient who holds this view is able to bear up any problem with patience and 
satisfaction because he or she is trying not to gain anything but to give up everything.
ii. In Buddhism even a single mental illness is not named. Instead the basic or root elements 
of mentality are explained mainly with reference to the above mentioned unwholesome 
and wholesome roots. All other mental problems arise depending on these basic elements.
There are three main reasons for not naming the mental illnesses.
1. Physical illnesses are durable and they can be easily identiﬁ ed while the mental illnesses 
are momentary and cannot be identiﬁ ed with certainty.
2. It is the nature of human beings that they always depend on concepts indicated by speciﬁ c 
terms of language in order to conﬁ rm their existence in the momentary world. Once they 
attach to a particular concept or word such as stress, depression or phobia referring to 
a mental illness the same word becomes a mental problem.11 It cannot be easily removed 
from the mind. Further the mental illness though we identify with some characteristics 
they never exist permanently. Searching for characteristics to identify mental illness 
is a deliberate attempt to deceive oneself. But the problem is that without naming 
an illness one cannot prescribe medicine. The delusion is that they believe mind 
is related to brain. As to Buddhism mind is a speci ﬁ c faculty in human personal-
ity and it is not only related to brain but to all the ﬁ ve physical sense faculties. 
8 Akusalam ūla, Akusalakamma
9 ummattako viya hi puthujjano, MA. 1., ed. Hevawitharana, Colombo, p. 23
10 m āna, D. 111., p. 234
11 Adhivacanasamphassa, D. 11., p. 62; M. 1., p. 113 D. 111., p. 86
59
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
3. Buddhist psychotherapeutic methods are mainly directed to change the mentality of 
persons and they do not pay much attention to change the environment or other external 
or physical factors so as to bring the mentality into a calm status. 
Practice of psycho-therapy is also based on a simple formula which can be expand and extend 
to meet with any mental problem of beings. The practice has three gradual stages:
i. development of moral behavior - behavioral therapy
ii. development of concentration - psychological therapy 
iii. development of understanding - cognitive therapy
The ﬁ rst type of therapy refers to the restrainment of the ﬁ ve senses which are mainly 
responsible for the physical and verbal behavior of man.12 The second type refers to the restrainment 
of the above mentioned mental disorders namely greed, hatred and delusion-conceit.13
The third type of therapy concerns the development of understanding of people regarding 
the true nature of the world of experience. 14 These three stages are mutually interconnected and 
they support for the restrainment and development of each aspect gradually. Therefore, in Buddhist 
practice these three stages should be connected with every method of psycho-therapy.15
It is not out of context to mention the relationship of physical body with the above stated 
three aspects of mental de ﬁ lements namely greed, hatred and delusion. The Bhesajjamañjus ā, 
the one and only Āyurvedic Pāli work available at present, states at the beginning that mental health 
should be maintained in accordance with the Tripi ṭaka and Bhesajjamañjusā instructs to establish 
physical health. According to the Āyurveda all physical illnesses are related to imbalance of 
the three humors - phlegm, bile and air. The Visuddhimagga mentions that these three humors are 
connected with mentality as follows:
greed - phlegm
hatred - bile
delusion - air16
Although there are many other causes and conditions that in ﬂ uence the physical health 
such as environment and food the mental condition plays a prominent role in balancing the physical 
condition.
It is a fact that any theory cannot be put into practice as it is. So the well educated Bud-
dhist psychologists can devise and develop various methods to be used in Buddhist psychiatry. All 
of them should be in conformity with the above mentioned basic elements of Buddhist theory and 
practice of psycho-therapy. And also it should be emphasized that all such methods bring tempo-
rary effects and the complete recovery of all mental problems can be achieved only through the 
realization of nibbāna, the summum bonum of Buddhist path to freedom. Until the ﬁ nal realization 
we should use such methods and I have developed some such methods depending on the Buddhist 
12 s īla, D. 111., p. 235
13 sam ādhi, A. 111., p. 12
14 paññ ā, D. 1., p. 245
15 S. 111., p. 83
16 Visuddhimagga, ed. Ven. Saddhatissa, Colombo, 1914, p. 76
60
Conference
cultural accounts and they are given below as an example. It should be stated that these methods are 
taught in the postgraduate courses in our university and they have already been used in Sri Lanka in 
the counseling programmes for over three years.
i. Confession: This method is derived from the practice of “ āpattidesanā” followed by 
Buddhist monks and nuns. If they commit anything wrong they have to declare it in front 
of another member of the Saṅgha society before the dawn of the next day. Accumulating 
the experiences of wrong actions create mental problems. So it is better to purify one’s 
mind by declaring every such incidents as a daily practice.
ii. Imitation: Ālavaka and A ṅgulimāla, well-known two characters in Buddhist canon 
were tamed by the Buddha ﬁ rst by agreeing with them. Ālavaka saw the Buddha sitting 
in his cave and ordered him to go out. Buddha followed three times his order ﬁ nally 
he was converted to Buddhism. As to this method ﬁ rst of all we should agree with 
the behavior of the mental patient. Otherwise we cannot control the patient as we wish.
iii. Generalization: Some people think that the mental problems affect them only. They 
become calm when they understand that such problems are common to many people in 
the society. Kisāgotam$ who was mad with the death of her son, realized the common 
nature of death for all beings when she was asked by the Buddha to bring some mustard 
seeds from a house where no one is dead.
iv. Kamma: The Buddhist theory of Kamma is a good therapeutic method that can be 
adopted successfully. There are some mental problems that cannot be analyzed properly 
revealing all causes and conditions. In such cases we can explain them that Kammas 
related to former lives may inﬂ uence the present life. After experiencing the effects of 
such Kammas we will be released from such effects in the future. This way of thinking 
in accordance with the theory of Kamma has created a contented society for over two 
thousand years in Buddhist countries.
v. Dialogue: In many discourses of the canon such as Kasbhāradvāja and Aggañña friendly 
dialogues of the Buddha with people occur and they are logical and philosophical. These 
dialogues have inﬂ uenced much for eliminating the mental problems of various types 
of persons. So we can use this method especially for educated people to help them to 
get rid of their mental problems.
vi. Noble silence: In some cases the best method  of treatment is to maintain complete 
silence without responding to the complaints made by patients. This method has solved 
many social and individual problems in Buddhist society.
vii. Psycho-analysis: With reference to Madhupiṇḍika, Mahānidāna sutta etc. we can introduce 
this method in which the counselor should analyze the psychological process of the patient 
in order to clarify the causes and conditions of the problem.
viii. Right motivation: According to the famous event of Nanda, he was taken to heaven by 
the Buddha in order to detach him from Janapadakalyāṇi by showing damsels. The theory 
of this method is that one cannot be totally detach from one concept at once. So the person 
should be motivated to achieve a higher goal and from there he or she should be directed 
to desired object. 
61
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
ix. Logical analysis: Some educated people like to argue with others. So the method of 
argument can be adapted to eliminate their problems. This also applies to educated
people. Vāseṭṭhasutta and Aggañña sutta are good examples in this regard.
x. Innocent punishment: Brahmadaṇḍa is a punishment in which all other members do 
not talk with the patient. This can be used mainly regarding persons with personality 
disorders such as anger and arrogance. The main feature of these punishments is that 
they never hurt the patient physically.
xi.  Praising: Some people are suffering due to the lack of appreciation for their service or 
work. Such people should be directed to suitable environment where they are appreciated. 
Before passing away Buddha did not forget to appreciate Ven. Ananda’s service and 
the beneﬁ ts of the last meal given by Cundakammāraputta.
xii.  Friendly meeting: Some people suffer mentally due to the lack of association with other 
people. They should be provided with such friendly meetings with suitable persons.
xiii.  Creating religious emotions: Pilgrimage is one of the most suitable way of creating 
religious emotions in order to get rid of mental problems such as worry, guilty-conscious, 
sorrow, etc.
xiv.  Creating emotion and intellect: this concept is called “vedalla” and the patient should 
be provided with occasions where they can experience happiness and knowledge together. 
Reading novels, watching drama, singing, dancing, etc. can be used in this regard.
The above mentioned methods are given as examples and they are not adequately explained.
62
Cognitive, Behavioral and Psychotherapeutic Aspects as 
Refl ected in Insight Meditation and Methods of Insight
R. M. Rathnasiri
Buddhist and Pali University of Sri Lanka
Objective:
The exposition of the universally applicable potentiality of cognitive and behavioral 
psychotherapeutic aspects re ﬂ ected in Insight Meditation in order to alleviate, attenuate, prevent 
and heal mental problems and abnormal behaviors in the modern society is the main objective of 
this article.
Background and Nature of Mind
The Abhidhamma Piṭaka contains a highly systematized psychological analysis of human 
behavior and mind. According to Roga Sutta1 and Salleka Sutta2, every individual except Arahant 
suffers from mental problems. According to commentaries, all worldlings are deranged (Sabbe 
puthujjanā ummattakā).3 
Individual’s mind is beleaguered by The Noxious Trio - greed-hatred-delusion (lobha-dosa-
moha) (Mūla Sutta).4 According to Loka Sutta5, this triple root, when arising, causes harm, stress and 
discomfort. Mind is deluded with ignorance (avijjā), the primary root that causes vipallāsa (perversions 
- saññā-vipallāsa, citta-vipallāsa and diṭṭhi-vipallāsa) 6  leading to form four perversions  which take 
what is impermanent (anicca) as permanent; what is painful (dukkha) as pleasant; what is without 
a self (anattā) as a self and what is impure (asubha) as pure.7 The three levels of perversions which 
are fundamental to the Buddhist notion of ignorance or delusion are cyclical, and so the perceptions 
are formed in the context of one’s views, which are strengthened by his thoughts, and all the three 
work together to build the cognitive systems which make up his personality. Vipall āsa caused by 
ignorance due to the Noxious Trio veils individual’s mental eyes and prevents the knowledge of the 
Four Truths, and this is conducive to diverse problematic mentality and behavior.
The rapid modernization and the accelerated pace of life enveloped in the ‘modern’ economy, 
polity, technology and education incur unwholesome impacts on the minds of people, causing: 
pressure, boredom, tension, anxiety, depression, frustration, unrest, obsession, disappointments, etc.; 
and unwholesome behaviors like alcoholism, drug addiction, sexual harassment, polygamous or 
polyandrous conduct, sadism, gambling etc. The culture of violence that has arisen as the outcome 
1  A ṅguttara Nikāya, PTS, IV .157. 
2  Majjhima Nik āya. 8, PTS: M i 40.
3  Vibha ṅga Aṭṭhakathā, PTS /Visuddhimagga V ol. II, Page. 208. Line 13, 6th Syn. Edition.
4  A ṅguttara Nikāya. 3.69, PTS: A i 201.
5  Sa ṃyutta Nikāya. 3.23, PTS: S i 98, CDB i 189.
6  A ṅguttara Nikāya. 4.49, PTS: A ii 52.
7  Manual of Insight by Ledi Sayadaw-WHEEL, 31/32, P. 5.
Background and Nature of Mind
Objective:
63
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
of commercially exploited sadism in numerous unethical entertainments, popular unscrupulous 
literature, and the sophisticated technology through which they are distributed on a global scale 
creating an international culture  of unwholesome life patterns that produce psychological problems 
and abnormal behaviors. As a result of the unawareness of Buddhist concepts that can be adopted to 
prevent or heal them, these problems get aggravated causing severe detriments to individual, family, 
society and the world as a whole. 
Buddhist Meditation
According to Suttas like: Sabbāsava, S āmaññaphala, J āliya, Mah āli of D īgha Nik āya; 
Kandaraka, Ariyapariyesana, Atṭhakanāgara of Majjhima Nikāya; Jhāna Saṃyuttaya of Saṃyutta 
Nikāya; Satipaṭthāna of Dīghanikāya and Majjhimanikāya;  also Dhammasaṅganī and Vibhaṅga of 
Abhidhamma Piṭaka; and commentaries like Visuddhimagga and the Atthasāḷinī - the basic meaning 
of bhāvanā, as a whole, can be rendered as the development of spiritual qualities or wholesome 
potentialities (sattabodhyaṅga) or development of wholesome doctrines “ Bhāveti kusaladhamme 
vaḍḍhetīti bhāvanā.”8  The Right Mindfulness and the Right Effort in the Noble Eightfold Path are 
the two principles that embrace the entire ﬁ eld of meditation common to both systems - Samatha 
and Vipassanā.
The Two Kinds of Meditation Designated in Buddhism
Sam ādhi-bh āvan ā ( Tranquility or Calm meditation) that cultivates concentration 
(citta-ekaggatā) suppresses mental deﬁ lements. The development of Calm or Tranquility meditation 
creates concentration for making the mind peaceful, strong, and happy, as well as freeing it from all 
mental hindrances. Samatha, a pre-requisite for meditation lays the foundation for practicing Insight 
meditation which is the direct way to eradicate all the mental problems. 
Vipassanā-bhāvanā that develops insight in the context of the Three Universal Characteristics 
helps one to eradicate the de ﬁ lements by dispelling ignorance and uprooting causes of miseries. 
Insight meditation helps one to develop true wisdom and to see all things as they really are, until 
one can get rid of the deﬁ lements and attachments to everything. 
In Sāmaññaphala Sutta9, the Threefold training with Sīla as the preliminary phase, the practice 
of Sam ādhi as the second and Paññ ā as the means of attaining ultimate release from Āsavās 
(mental taints). Paññā is developed by Insight. Sabbāsava Sutta10  deals with seven ways of eradicating 
deﬁ lements that cause mental and physical problems. Among them, the ﬁ rst method is dassan ā 
–understanding and the last method is ‘bh āvanā’. The highest stage of understanding is wisdom 
which is the realization of all the mental and physical phenomena. Hence, meditation is the means 
of transmuting the ordinary consciousness to the higher state. 
8  Buddhist Meditation Methods & Psychotherapy, Galamangoda Sumanapala, P. 17.
9  D īghanikāya 2 PTS: D i 47
10  Majjhimanik āya, 2 PTS: M i 6 
The Two Kinds of Meditation Designated in Buddhism
Buddhist Meditation
64
Conference
The Sevenfold Purity Expounded in Insight Meditation
Rathavin īta Sutta 11 expounds sevenfold purity–satta visuddhi (elaborated in 
the Visuddhimagga and in Abhidhammaṭṭha-saṅgaha) as the seven successive methods of 
puriﬁ cation in Insight meditation:
1. Purity of Morality: S īla-visuddhi
2. Purity of Mind: Citta-visuddhi
3. Purity of Views: Di ṭṭi-visuddhi
4. Purity  of overcoming Doubts: Ka ṇkhāvitaraṇa-visuddhi
5. Purity of Knowledge and Vision of what is Path and Not-Path: Maggāmagga-ñāṇadassana-
visuddhi
6. Purity of Knowledge and Vision of the Way or Progress: Paṭipadā-ñāṇadassana-visuddhi
7. Purity of Knowledge and Insight: Ñ āṇadassana-visuddhi
Each of them puriﬁ es body, mind and thoughts in a gradual process. The Dasuttara Sutta12
of D īghanikāya explains the Sevenfold Puri ﬁ cations among nine factors of endeavor leading to 
puriﬁ cation (pārisuddhi-padhāniyaṅga), out of which the last two are puri ﬁ cation of wisdom and 
puriﬁ cation of emancipation. In the context of the seven successive methods of puriﬁ cation, purity 
in a nutshell means the elimination of unwholesome factors repugnant to puriﬁ cation. 
Methods of Insight Meditation in brief
Insight Meditation (Vipassanā Bhāvanā) comprises of many methods developed on the basis 
of the last ﬁ ve of the Sevenfold Purity through the contemplations of transience, unsatisfactoriness 
and non-self (aniccānupassanā, dukkhānupassanā and anattānupassanā). The practice of Vipassanā 
begins at the Fifth Step of Purity (Maggāmagga-ñāṇadassana visuddhi) with the Contemplation of 
Groups (kalāpa-sammasana) that results in developing insight into Knowledge of Determination 
(Sammasana-ñāṇa). It is the knowledge that determines all that is in the present, past and future, 
internal or external, coarse or delicate, low or eminent, near or far is impermanent (anicca), suffering 
(dukkha) and non-self (anatta). This is elaborated in the Visuddhimagga.13
Rathavinīta Sutta (The Discourse on the Relay of Chariots) shows the causal relations of each 
stage of purity - each stage of purity is to be accomplished for the sake of the other stage of purity.14
Thus, the sevenfold purity is the true knowledge of phenomenal existence, and it is linked with the Four 
Noble Paths that lead directly to ultimate realization. 
The Buddha emphasized the importance of the contemplation of pañcaskhandha in 
the forty aspects of it explaining an advanced knowledge of insight known as anuloma-khanti 
which is adaptive knowledge of balance applied to absolute certainty (sammattaniyāma) of the First 
11  Ibid 24, PTS: M i 145
12  The Long Discourses of the Buddha, Tr. by Maurice Walshe, 34, P. 511.
13  The Path of Puri ﬁ cation, Tr. by Bhikkhu Ñānamoli, Chapter xx, 6, p.706.
14  Majjhimanik āya  24. PTS: M i 145
Methods of Insight Meditation in brief
The Sevenfold Purity Expounded in Insight Meditation
65
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Path (sotāpatti-magga). The Paṭisambhidāmagga gives this list of forty items of contemplation in 
the context of the Five Aggregates ( pañcaskhandha) establishing absolute certainty. These Forty 
Subjects for meditation15 known as kammaṭṭhāna in seven divisions16 are explained in the Path of 
Puriﬁ cation.
The Visuddhimagga, the Great commentary elaborates two aspects of kamma ṭṭhāna in 
Insight Meditation as Rūpa-kammaṭṭhāna and Arūpa-kammaṭṭhāna17 which should be contemplated 
in terms of the Three Universal Characteristics of material aggregates and mental states respectively. 
The Visuddhimagga exposes Eighteen Principal Insights ( Aṭṭharasa mah āvipassanā)18 
which dispel mental states that impede higher progress. In the development process of these eighteen 
insights, a contemplation known as sammasana-ñāṇa as mentioned above (determining of all phenomena 
of existence as anicca, dukkha, a nattā), the beginning of insight which is still mundane is reached. 
This is the ﬁ rst stage of the development of insight.
The Paṭisambhidāmagga explains that a contemplation known as udaya-vaya anupassanā-ñāṇa 
(the knowledge and insight into rise and fall of the Five Aggregates of present existence) is attained. 
This is the second stage which leads to the manifestation of insight. In this process, the rise of mind-
and-matter (Nāma-rūpa) in twenty ﬁ ve aspects and the fall of mind-and-matter in twenty ﬁ ve aspects 
in relation to their causes and conditions are contemplated. It is at this stage that the Ten Deﬁ lements 
of Insight (Vipassan ā-kilesa)19 arise. With the overcoming of the Ten De ﬁ lements of Insight, 
the Purity of Knowledge and Vision of the Way or Progress (Pa ṭipadā-ñānadassana-visuddhai) is 
attained. The continuous practice in relation to the Four Supra mundane Paths leads to the attainment 
of Purity of Knowledge and Insight (Ñāṇadassana-visuddhi). 
The mental development with insight in the process of suppressing, alleviating and eradicating 
all deﬁ lements or taints (sabbāsava) can also be attained through the following.
1. The Contemplation of the Body (K āyānupassanā)
2. The Contemplation of feelings (Vedan ānupassanā)
3. The Contemplation of the state of consciousness (Citt ānupassanā) 
4. The Contemplation of the mind-objects (Dhamm ānupassanā)
15 The Path of Puri ﬁ cation, Tr. by Bhikkhu Ñ ānamoli, Chapter xx, 18, PP. 710-711: Impermanent, suffering, disease, 
boil, arrow, calamity, af ﬂ iction, alien, disintegrating, plague, disaster, terror, menace, ﬁ ckle, perishable, unenduring, 
no protection, no shelter, no refuge, empty, vain, void, not self, danger, subject to change, no core, root of calamity, 
murderous, due to be annihilated, subject to cankers, formed, M āra’s bait, subject to birth, subject to ageing, subject to 
ailment, subject to death, subject to sorrow, subject to lamentation, subject to despair, subject to deﬁ lement.
16 Ibid, Chapter III, 104, P. 112: Ten Kasi ṇas (totalities), Asubhas (foulness), Ten Anussatis (recollections), Four 
Brahma-vihāras (the Four Sublime Abodes), Four Arūpas (four immaterial states), Āhāre-paṭikkūla-saññā (perception of 
loathsomeness of food), Catu-dhātu-vavatthāna (analysis of the four physical elements).
17 Ibid, Chapter XIV , 11, P.482.  
18 Ibid, Chapter  xx, 89, P. 732.
19 The Path of Puri ﬁ cation , Chapter xx, 105, P.739.
66
Conference
The Sevenfold Purity and Its Cognitive, Behavioral and Psychotherapeutic Aspects 
1. Purity of Morality (S īla-visuddhi) is the puri ﬁ cation attained through refraining from 
bodily and verbal misconduct as well as from unwholesome livelihood. It is the non-transgression 
through body or speech of the basic precepts regulating the moral life, developing into the habitual 
conformation to the principles of righteous conduct. It is not the mere outward behavioral control. 
The moral purity which is of deeper and more psychological signi ﬁ cance is the inner puri ﬁ cation 
of character. Thus, the two- dimensional quality of moral purity is the puri ﬁ cation of conduct and 
the puriﬁ cation of character. 
Morality (Sīla) which is the conscious and intentional restraint from unwholesome deeds is 
volition (cetanā) manifested in speech and bodily action, and it is the foundation of entire Buddhist 
practice. Moral purity is one of the three constituents of the Noble Eightfold Path ( sīla, samādhi
and paññā). They are Right Speech, Right Action and Right Livelihood. The development of moral 
purity - the basic morality of Five Precepts ( pañcasīla) for laity, the basic morality of Eight 
Precepts (aṭṭha-sīla) for laity, The Ten Precepts ( dasa-sīla) for novice monks and nuns, and 227 
moral rules for fully ordained monks ( bhikkhu pātimokkha) and 311moral rules for fully ordained 
nuns (bhikkhunī-pātimokkha) is the overall ethical behavior. The Virtue of the Fourfold Puriﬁ cation 
(Catupārisuddhi-sīla)20 designated for monks is known as Sīla Visuddhi.  
Moral intention is Cetan ā Sīla, mental concomitants are Cetasika S īla, moral restraint is 
Saṃvara Sīla, and not breaking any precepts is Avitik-kama Sīla. Moral intention (Cetanā) is one’s 
intention not to commit evil conduct in act and in speech, but to follow the seven wholesome courses 
of action (abstention from killing, stealing, adultery and improper speech such as lying, backbiting, 
divisive speech and gossip). 
Moral abstinence (Virati) is refraining from all unwholesome courses of action and 
speech along with other immoral behavior. Virati also includes mental actions or thoughts which are 
refraining from covetousness, ill will and wrong view. As the Buddha preached, “Monks, he who 
eliminates covetousness will have moral mentality.” This is Cetasika Sīla. 
2. Purity of Mind (Citta-visuddhi) signi ﬁ es the puri ﬁ cation attained through cleansing 
the mind from attachment, aversion, torpor, restlessness and conﬂ ict. It is of eight attainments: Four 
rūpa Jhānās and Four ar ūpa Jhānas (asta samāpati) with access-concentration (upacāra –samādhi) 
which has the capacity to suppress the Five Hindrances (pañcanīvaraṇa) 21.
3. Purity of Views (Diṭṭi-visuddhi) implies the understanding the combination of mind and 
matter (nāma-rūpa) or the Five Aggregates (pañcaskhandha) dispelling erroneous conceptions or 
perversions (vipallāsa) of individuality and attainment of real vision of mind and body and their 
relation to phenomenal existence through the comprehension of mind-and-matter ( nāma-rūpa) by 
the analysis of the Four Elements ( bhūta) or by contemplation of the thirty two constituent parts 
of the body ( kuṇupa) or by Eighteen Elements ( dhātu), the six senses, the six sense-objects and 
20 Visuddhimagga, Chapter I, 42, PP. 16-17.  Virtue of Restraint of monks’ Disciplinary Code (Pātimokkha saṃvara sīla), 
Virtue of Restraint of the sense faculties ( Indriya saṃvara sīla), Virtue of Puri ﬁ cation of livelihood ( Ājīva pārisuddhi 
sīla), Virtue of concerning  Requisites (Paccaya sannissita sīla).
21 D īghanikāya Poṭṭhapāda Sutta 9 PTS: D i 178 / Aṅguttaranikāya 9.64 PTS: A iv 457: Sensual Desire     (kāmacchanda), 
Ill-will (vyāpāda),  Sloth and Torpor (thīna-middha), Restlessness and Worry (uddhacca-kukkucca) and Skeptical Doubt 
(vicikicchā).
67
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
the six kinds of consciousness corresponding to them or Twelve Sense-Bases ( āyatana): the six 
sense-organs and the six sense-objects and the entire mental process attached to it with all their 
characteristic transience.
4. Purity of overcoming Doubts (Ka ṇkhāvitaraṇa-visuddhi) is the conquest of all doubts 
regarding the phenomenal existence through the comprehension of the causal relation of mind and 
body (nāma-rūpa) understanding their causes and conditions in the context of sa ṁsāric existence. 
The knowledge of discerning conditionality sees only a conditioning body-and-mind process 
and a conditioned body-and-mind process. In other words, it is the knowledge that comprehends 
the law of kamma and its result in the context of mind and body and the comprehension established 
by dispelling doubts about the three phases of time - past, present and future by discerning 
the conditions of mentality-materiality.
5. Purity of Knowledge and Vision of what is Path and Not-Path (Maggāmagga-ñāṇadassana-
visuddhi) denotes the attainment of knowledge or insight into the Right path and Wrong path. 
That means it is the understanding that distinguishes the difference between the direct path and 
the misleading path. The practical method is known as comprehension by groups (kalāpa-sammasana) 
which is the contemplation on body and mind in their Three Universal Characteristics (anicca, dukkha 
and anattā). Here, the knowledge of Arising and Passing away of mental and material phenomena 
(udaya-vaya) occurs in two phases: undeveloped phase and mature phase. In the undeveloped phase, 
the Ten Imperfections of Insight22 (dasa vipassanā-upakkilesa) occur. These Ten Deﬁ lements of Insight, 
forming the Not-Path, which mislead insight, impede the progress in meditation. The realization of 
these imperfections is the puri ﬁ cation by knowledge and vision of Right Path, and the avoidance 
of the imperfections leads to the attainment of true insight. Besides this, three kinds of mundane 
full-understanding23 are attained and a part of the Eighteen Principal Insights24 is attained by means 
of full-understanding as abandoning.
6. Purity of Knowledge and Vision of the Way or Progress (Paṭipadā-ñāṇadassana-visuddhi). 
At this stage, with the absence of the inimical inﬂ uences of the Ten Imperfections of Insight, insight 
reaches its culmination through a gradual and steady progress (known as pa ṭipadā) which consists 
of the Eight Knowledges25 with Knowledge in Conformity with Truth (saccānulomika-ñāṇa), as the 
ninth. This is the knowledge adapted to the Four Noble Truths.  The knowledge of contemplation of 
dissolution (bhaṅgānupassanā-ñāṇa), one of the Eight Knowledges is conducive to eight advantages:
1. Elimination of wrong views regarding becoming
2. Abandoning the craving for life
22 Visuddhimagga.xx,105, P.739- illumination ( obhāsa), knowledge ( ñāṇa), zest ( pīti), serenity ( passaddhi), bliss   
(sukha), resolve ( adhimokkha), exaltation ( paggaha), mindfulness ( upaṭṭhāna), equanimity ( upekkhā) and attachment 
(nikanti).
23 Ibid, xx 3, P.704 - Ñ ātapariññā-full understanding as the known, Tiraṇa-pariññā- full understanding as scrutiny, and 
full understanding as abandoning.
24 Ibid, Chapter xx, 89. P.732.
25 Ibid, Chapter xx (I) 93, P. 734, Chapter XXI (II)3, P. 746 - Knowledge of contemplation of rise and fall 
(udayavayānupassanā-ñāṇa), Knowledge of contemplation of dissolution (bha ṅgānupassanā-ñāṇa), Knowledge of 
appearance as terror (bhayatūpaṭṭhāna-ñāṇa), Knowledge of contemplation of danger (ādīnavānupassanā-ñāṇa), Knowledge 
of contemplation of detachment (nibbidānupassanā-ñāṇa), Knowledge of desire for deliverance (muñcitukamyatā-ñāṇa), 
Knowledge of contemplation of re ﬂ ection (pa ṭisaṅkhānupassanā-ñāṇa), Knowledge of equanimity about formations 
(saṅkhārupekkhā-ñāṇa). 
68
Conference
3. Constant application in what is suitable
4. Purity of livelihood
5. Elimination of anxiety
6. Expulsion of fear
7. Possession of patience and self-control
8. Overcoming of dissatisfaction
7. Purity of Knowledge and Insight (Ñ āṇadassana-visuddhi): This is the complete purity 
gained through the knowledge of the Four Noble Paths – the path of Stream-entry, the path of Once-
return, the path of Non-return and the path of Perfect Holiness.26 The knowledge of these Four Supra 
mundane Paths that lead to the total eradication of all de ﬁ lements is the purity of Knowledge and 
Insight. 
Cognitive, Behavioral and Psychotherapeutic Aspects as 
refl ected in Insight Meditation
The ﬁ rst step of Satta Visuddhi, Sīla visuddhi (Purity of morality) illustrates the behavioral 
therapy which is the preparation for the foundation of Insight, and the other steps of Satta Visuddhi 
depict the cognitive and psychotherapeutic aspects in Insight meditation.
1. Purity of Morality
Behavioral and Psychotherapeutic Aspects of Morality
Morality or Sīla is the foundation of all meritorious actions. S īla helps create a state of 
the mind that is not overwhelmed by fear, anxiety, remorse and confusion. Sīla strengthens our courage 
and ability. It lays the foundation for meditation practice and provides psychological strength. 
It is this foundation that is absolutely necessary to gain concentration. In a way, morality prepares 
the ground for planting the seeds of mental cultivation which gives rise to the tree of wisdom. 
Morality enables a person to feel the basic level of safety and security that is a requisite for 
the practice of mental cultivation and wisdom. Sīla-visuddhi (Purity of morality) leads to purity of 
mind. Purity of mind (Cittavisuddhi) which is the basic foundation for penetrating the Four Noble 
Truths as well as all conditioned phenomena and the unconditioned which is Nirvāna. 
The Therapeutic Rewards and Blessing of Morality
Freedom from remorse, acquisition of Joy, Rapture, Tranquility, Happiness, Concentration, 
Vision and knowledge according to reality, Turning away and detachment, The vision and knowledge 
with regard to Deliverance,  
26 Visuddhimagga. Chapter XXII, 1, 2, P.785. sot āpatti-magga, sakadāgāmi-magga, anāgāmi-magga and arihatta-magga
Cognitive, Behavioral and Psychotherapeutic Aspects as 
reflected in Insight Meditation
69
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Five Advantages through the Practice of Morality
The Buddha preached the following five benefits gained through the observance of 
the precepts.  Great increase of wealth and prosperity through diligence, Noble reputation, Conﬁ dent 
deportment without timidity in every society, Serene Death after a full life-span, Re-birth in a happy 
state or in a heavenly world.27 
The Wholesome Results gained by keeping the Five Precepts:
The First Precept – no physical disabilities, no dry and wilted look, no weakness and 
sluggishness, no fear of dangers, no fear of being killed by others and committing suicide, no lots 
of diseases, no loss of friends and no short life. 
The Second Precept – no poverty,  no loss of your belongings to the Five Enemies (water 
or ﬂ ood, ﬁ re or conﬂ agrations, thieves, tyrants or bad leaders and unloved heirs like bad sons and 
daughters). 
The Third Precept – not hated by many , no lots of enemies , peace , happy family, no shame 
and embarrassment, no physical deformities, no much worries,  no separation from your loved ones.
The Fourth Precept – no unclear speech, no crooked teeth, no foul mouth, no dull senses, 
no lack of honor, no roughness in speech, no lack of calm.
The Fifth Precept – no loss of judgment, not being lazy, not being forgetful, not being insane, 
sense of gratitude, moral shame and moral fear.
Behavioral, Cognitive and Psychotherapeutic Process of Sīla
By abstaining from immoral speech, actions and livelihood, the quality of blamelessness 
with non-remorse as the beneﬁ t can be achieved. One who observes the precepts is dear and loved 
by his companions holding him in high esteem. Non–remorse leads to joy ( pīti) and bliss (sukha), 
followed by tranquility ( passadhi ), the proximate cause of concentration ( samādhi). With 
concentrated mind, one is able to penetrate into the true nature of things (yathābhūta-ñāna) through 
Insight (vipassānā) and attain the Path and Fruition Knowledge (magga-phala ñāṇa). Thus, Sīla is of 
many therapeutic aspects beginning with non-remorse and ending with the realization of Nibbāna. 
The Moral Purity purges the mind of its inferior, mean and inimical propensities and paves the way 
for inward puriﬁ cation.
2. Purity of Mind 
The following mental disorders suffered by the Deluded-natured (moha-carita) are brought 
into diminution by Purity of Mind.
• th īna-middha  - sloth and torpor (3rd of the Five Hindrances), 
• uddhacca  - restlessness (one mental hindrance and also one of the Ten Fetters)28, 
27 Visuddhimagga Chapter I, (IV), 23, P.9.
28  AN 10.13 PTS: A v 17 Saṃyojana Sutta ,(sakkāya-diṭṭhi, vicikicchā, sīlabbata-parāmāsa, kāma-rāga, vyāpāda, rūpa-rāga, 
arūpa-rāga, māna, uddhacca and avijjā. 
70
Conference
• kukkucca   - wrongly-performed-ness like scruples, remorse, uneasiness of conscience, 
worry vicikicchā  - skeptical doubts (one of the three fetters)  
3. Purity of Views
Due to Di ṭṭhi Visuddhi, one attains the view of reality or seeing things as they are 
(yathābhūta-dassana) that avoids falling into extremes and forming perversions or distortions of 
views (diṭṭḥi-vipallāsa). The misconception that causes one to think as “I-ness” or “I am-conceit” 
(ego-conceit, asmi-māna) is eliminated. Seeing the transience of the Five Aggregates and their 
relation to phenomenal existence, he is not worried by the vicissitude of the world. A potentiality to 
face and overcome sorrow and lamentation is developed, and mindfulness to understand the truth that 
everything is impermanent including our own lives is developed. A wakefulness that everything is 
changing all of the time is created. By seeing this truth of impermanence of all worldly vicissitudes, 
our mind is trained to maintain equanimity leading to balance of our mind.
The Overall Therapeutic Beneﬁ ts of Insight Meditation
• Decreasing and ridding the mind of various kinds of mental de ﬁ lements which cause 
suffering.
• Increase of happiness with the reduction of suffering.
• Becoming detached from all the matters to which one used to be attached and as a result, 
being free from disturbances by worldly currents.
• Firm establishment of mind and development of wisdom to see things as they really are. 
As a result, one is unrufﬂ ed, not swinging either way by worldly conditions - gain or loss, 
honor or dishonor, praise or blame, happiness or suffering - the vicissitude of the world.
• Decrease of sel ﬁ shness and increase of sacriﬁ ces for the beneﬁ t of others.
• Development of a much more re ﬁ ned mind endowed with virtue in proportion to the level 
of practice reached.
• True peace of mind endowed with happiness which is unperturbed by secular matters.
Ten Asubhas (objects of impurities) and Kāyagatā-sati (mindfulness of body) are a therapeutic 
methods for mental disorders suffered by the Lust-natured (rāga-carita) such as hallucinatory habits 
(māyā), fraudulent tactics (sāṭheya), pride in all actions (māna), delight in sinful actions (pāpicchatā), 
unlimited desires (mahicchatā), unsatisfactoriness (asantutthitā), deep rooted deﬁ lements in every 
action, vacillation in duties (cāpalya), no fearing of any sinful action (anottappa), lack of moral shame 
in any sinful action (ahirika), infatuated mood in any function (mado), unconscious mind (pamāda).
Four Kasiṇas: nīla, pīta, lohita and odāta and the Brahma-vihāras are a therapy for mental 
disorders suffered by the Hate-natured (dosa-carita) such as provocation in day today life actions 
(kodho), hatred (upanāha), covering others’ good qualities (makkhī), comparing one’s good qualities 
with himself (pal āsa), intolerance of others’ wealth (iss ā), hiding his wealth from the others 
(macchariya).
71
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Ānāpāna-sati: is a therapy for the mental disorders possessed by the Deluded-natured 
(Moha-carita) such as sloth and torpor (thīna-middha), restlessness (uddhacca), scruples, remorse, 
uneasiness of conscience (kukkucca), skeptical doubts (vicikicchā).
Six Anussatis: Buddha, Dhamma, Sa ṅgha, sīla, cāga, devatā are a therapy for the mental 
disorders possessed by Saddhā-carita.
Maraṇa-sati: upasam ānussati, āhārepaṭikūla-saññ ā, catudh ātu-vavatth āna - Buddhi or 
Intelligence.
Six Kasiṇas: paṭhavi, āpo, tejo, vāyo, ākāsa, āloka, and Four Arūpas – Sabba-carita or mixed 
character.
The psychotherapeutic aspects as reﬂ ected in the Eighteen Principal Insights
1. The contemplation of Impermanence (anicc ānupassanā) abandons the perception of 
permanence.
2. The contemplation of Suffering (dukkh ānupassanā) abandons the perception of pleasure.
3. The contemplation of Not-self (anatt ānupassanā) abandons the perception of self.
4. The contemplation of Dispassion (nibbid ānupassanā) abandons delighting.
5. The contemplation of Fading Away (vir āgānupassanā) abandons greed.
6. The contemplation of Cessation (nirod ānupassanā) abandons originating.
7. The contemplation of Relinquishment (pa ṭinissaggānupassanā) abandons grasping.
8. The contemplation of Destruction (kh āyānupassan ā) abandons the conception of 
compactness.
9. The contemplation of Fall (of formations) (vay ānupassanā) abandons the accumulation 
of kamma.
10. The contemplation of Change (vipari ṇāmānupassanā) abandons the conception of 
lastingness.
11. The contemplation of the Signless or the unconditioned (animittānupassanā) abandons 
sign.
12. The contemplation of Desirelessness (apa ṇihatānupassanā) abandons desire.
13. The contemplation of V oidness (suññatānupassanā) abandons misinterpreting (insistence).
14. The development of the Insight into phenomena (higher understanding or wisdom) 
(adhipaññā-dhamma-vipassanā) abandons misinterpreting (insistence) due to grasping 
at once.
15. The development of Correct Knowledge and Vision (yathā-bhūta-ñāṇadassana) abandons 
misinterpreting (insistence) due to confusion.
16. The development of Danger or Misery ( ādīnavānupassanā) abandons misinterpreting 
(insistence) due to reliance.
17. The contemplation of Re ﬂ exion (paṭisankhānupassanā) abandons non-reﬂ extion.
72
Conference
18. The contemplation of Turning Away (viva ṭṭanānupassanā) abandons misinterpreting 
(insistence) due to bondage.
The Overall Therapeutic Results of Insight Meditation 
The behavioral problems caused by the adverse actions and evil speeches (detrimental 
bodily activities and malevolent verbal expressions) which are inimical to individual and 
society can be overcome through the Moral Purity, and this can be taken as an aspect of 
Vikkhambhana-pahāna29 - overcoming by suspension or repression (a temporary suppression of 
taints which lead to mental problems).
The adverse ideas and erroneous views are overcome through the Eighteen Insights, and this 
way of overcoming (the idea of permanence by impermanence, the idea of pleasure by suffering, 
self by Not-self, etc.) is known as The Overcoming by the Opposites – Tadāṅga-pahāna30
The mental problems caused due to attachment, aversion, torpor, restlessness and con ﬂ ict 
are overcome by  the Purity of Mind (Citta-visuddhi) through eight attainments -four r ūpa Jhānās 
and four ar ūpa Jh ānas (asta sam āpati) with access-concentration (upac āra –sam ādhi) which has 
the potentiality to suppress the Five Hindrances (pañcanīvaraṇa). The overcoming by tranquilization 
is Paṭipassaddhi-pahāna.
All the behavioral and mental problems are completely overcome by the complete purity 
gained through the knowledge of the Noble Paths with the ﬁ nal attainment - arihatta-magga
leading to the total eradication of all deﬁ lements through the Purity of Knowledge and Insight. This 
is known as the Samuccheda- pahāna –overcoming by destruction.
Conclusion
Modern psychoanalysis works on the assumption that when the origin of a mental disorder is 
revealed, its inﬂ uence on unconscious motivation will automatically disappear. Such psychoanalysis 
has so far not been successful in diagnosing the root causes that bring into being mental problems 
and unwholesome behaviors. Hence, modern psychiatry or psychotherapy is incapable of the total 
eradication of problematic mentality that causes problematic behavior. 
Buddhism which analyses the root causes of problematic personality in the context of 
the Noxious Trio – greed, hatred and delusion exposes a highly systematized psychological analysis 
of human mind and behavior with the prominence to the mind (mano pubbaṅgamā dhammā – mano 
seṭṭhā manomayā”).31 The cognitive, behavioral and psychotherapeutic aspect re ﬂ ected in Insight 
Meditation is that when the mind is gradually puri ﬁ ed, body and speech are cleansed. The total 
purity of mind brings about the complete eradication of all taints or cankers putting an end to all 
types of mental disorders and problematic behaviors. Eventually, the cognitive, behavioral and 
psychotherapeutic methods reﬂ ected in Insight Meditation can profusely be adopted to cure mental 
problems and abnormal behaviors in the modern society.
29  Buddhist Dictionary-Manual of Buddhist Terms & Doctrines by Nyanatiloka, P. 353.
30  Ibid, P.365.
31  The Dhammapada, K. Sri Dhammananada, verse 1–Yamaka Vagga P. 41.
Conclusion
73
Psychotherapeutic Value of Visuddhimagga for 
the Enhancement of Modern Psychotherapy
Dr. Wasantha Priyadarshana
Postgraduate Institute of Pāli & Buddhist Studies
University of Kelaniya
Introduction
The Visudhimagga written by Ven. Buddhaghosa could be recognized as the Manual of 
Theravāda Buddhist Psychology due to its salient psychological theories discussed therein. It is 
mentioned in the Mah āvaṃsa, the Great Chronicle (the greatest historical record of Ceylon) that 
the Visuddhimagga came into being as a result of commenting upon two stanzas from Saṃyutta-nikāya 
in order to get the permission from Mah āvihāra authority for translating Sinhalese commentaries 
into Pāli language.1 At the inception of the Visuddhimagga, the objective of composition is explained 
as to prescribe treatments for: the inner tangle (antojat ā) and the outer tangle (bahijat ā) faced by 
the ordinary man (putujjanā).2
And on the other hand, a special attention should be paid on why this compendium was 
named as the Visuddhimagga. In the early Buddhist context, the term “visuddhi” has been utilized 
to render the meaning of Nibb āna ( summum bonum ). As far as the entire meaning of the term 
“Nibbāna” is concerned, it provides the meaning as happiness, contentment and peace.3 Nibbāna is 
so called because; it blows out the ﬁ res of greed, hatred, and delusion.4 When these ﬁ res are blown 
out peace is attained, and one becomes completely cooled (sitibata). The individual who experienced 
“Nibbāna” in this very life is called as sitibhūta5, cooled person. The reason why this person is known 
as sitibhūta means, because he/she completely eradicated noxious trio (desire, hatred and delusion) 
which makes a person hot, restless and induce him/her into problematic behaviors (p āpakāri) and 
various types of mental disorders (cetasikorogo).6 Taking this entire meaning of the term “Nibbāna” 
into consideration, Ven. Buddhaghosa names this compendium as Visuddhimagga. Psychotherapeutic 
strategies revealed by commentator Buddhaghosa are centered on three fold training 7 (morality, 
concentration, and wisdom).  This Threefold training elaborated in Visuddhimagga, in terms of 
sattavisuddhi (sevenfold puriﬁ cation), tries to transform three aspects of the individual as a therapeutic 
means. And on the other hand, various psychotherapeutic strategies advocated by the commentary 
1  Extended Mah āvaṃsa, Malalasekara, P.T.S, 1988, Chapter, xxxvii verse, p. 215
2  Sa ṃyuttanikāya, i, P.T.S, 1973, P,165: anto jat ā bahijat ā jat āya jatita paj ā ta ṃ ta ṃ go tama pucch āmi koima ṃ 
vijataye jatā.  There are these two tangles, the inner tangle and the outer tangle. The people are enmeshed in these two 
tangles; and I ask thee Gotama, this question, who succeeds in disentangling these tangles”. 
3  Suttanip āta, ed, D, Andersen and H. Smith, P.T.S, 1931,p. 235
4  Sa ṃyuttanikāya, iv, P.T.S, p.19
5  Suttanip āta, ed D Andersen and H.Smith, P.T.S, pp. 542, 642
6  A ṅguttaranikāya, ii, P.T.S, pp. 142, 143
7  Sa ṃyuttanikaya, i, P.T.S, 1973, p. 165. “sile pati ṭṭhāya naro sappañño citta ṃ pañña ṇca bh āvayaṃ at āpi nipako 
bhkkhū soimaṃ vijaṭaye jaṭaṃ.”  When a wise man establishes well in virtue, develops his mind and attains wisdom, such 
a Bhikkhu ardent and sagacious, succeeds in disentangling this tangle” –Visuddhimagga.
Introduction
74
Conference
show us various signiﬁ cances that are so relevant to this modern world. Therefore, the objective of 
this research paper is to disclose how far these strategies could be adopted for the enhancement of 
the repertoire of modern psychotherapy.
Psychopathology and Visuddhimagga
In the third and twenty second chapters of Visuddhimagga, the basic features of Theravāda 
Buddhist Psychopathology have been discussed. It is evident from these chapters that the entire scope 
of Psychopathology also has been well elaborated in terms of three categories. They are as follows.
• Psychological in ﬂ uence of noxious trio8
• Physical in ﬂ uences of four elements and three humors.9
• Kammic in ﬂ uence of previous causes.10
Psychological Infl uence of the Noxious Trio
Commentator, Ven. Buddhagosha discusses with a great exposition the entire psychological 
background of deﬁ lements (kilesa) and its provocations towards various problematic behaviors and 
Psychiatric disorders.11 Desire (rāga), hatred (dosa) and delusion are the central intrinsic deﬁ lements 
in the ﬁ eld of Theravāda Buddhist philosophy. Further, various aspects of these three elements are 
discussed in Theravāda Buddhist philosophy in terms of various generic terms, namely, ten fetters 
(dasasaṃyojanāni), the ten corruptions (dasakilesā), ten wrongnesses (dasamichattā), four perversions 
(cattāravipallāsā), forties (cattāroganthā) four injustices (cattāssoagati), four cankers (cattāroāsavā), 
four floods (catt āroogha), five hindrances (pañca n īvaran āṇi), one adherence (par āmāso), 
four clinging (catt āriupādāna), seven inherent tendencies (satt ānusayā), three stains (tinimal āni), 
ten unwholesome courses of action (dasa akusalakammapath ā), and twelve unwholesome thought 
arisings (dvādasākusalacittuppādā). Although these de ﬁ lements (kilesa) are discussed in terms of 
various generic terms, in the context of psychological analysis, all these elements come under three 
crucial ingredients as desire (lobha) hared (dosa) moha (delusion). The nature of desire (dosa) and 
its function has been graphically elaborated in the early Buddhism as impulse (k āmacchanda), 
excitement (r āga) enjoyment (nandi) love (sineha) thirst (pip āsa) consuming passion (paril āha) 
etc. According to the psychological analysis of Visuddhimagga, desire acts as a primordial essence 
which is conducive to provide happy and unhappy destinies.12 It is very clear from the psychological 
analysis of Visuddhimagga that “desire” (lobha) has various functions leading human beings to 
acquire their primary and secondary needs. But in the actual world, individual is unable to acquire 
their wants and needs. The reason is the inevitable fact known as anicca or impermanence.  In front 
of their failures due to impermanence (anicca), the next psychological reaction that originates in 
the mind is known as “dosa” or hatred. The individual who fails to acquire his/her wants and needs and 
provocated by dosa or hatred differs from a clam person. According to early Buddhist explanations, 
8  Visuddhimagga  Tr. by Bhikkhu Ñ ānamoli , Taipei, Taiwan, R. O. C.1956,  xxii pp, 798,806
9  Ibid  iii, pp,102,104
10  Visuddhimagga  Tr. by Bhikkhu Ñ ānamoli , Taipei,Taiwan, R. O. C, 1956,  iii, pp,104,105
11  Ibid,  xxii,pp,798,806
12  The Dynamic Psychology of Early Buddhism, R.E.A Johansson, Oxford, 1978, P, 105
Psychopathology and Visuddhimagga
Psychological Infl uence of the Noxious Trio
75
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
an individual inﬂ uenced by hared does not restate to get revenge from himself (attaṃtapa) and from 
the society (paraṃtapa).13 As a result of this revengeful situation,14 the individual led by hatred cannot 
understand the natural circumstances as they are. This infatuated situation of individual has been 
graphically discussed in the Theravāda Buddhism as the condition of moha (delusion). This infatuated 
mentality leads persons into various problematic behaviors and many psychiatric disorders. 
Kammic Infl uences as a Crucial Ingredient of Psychopathology
Kammic inﬂ uences belong to previous existences are concerned here as a central element 
that can affect present physical and mental performances. Kammic inﬂ uence plays here an important 
role as the signi ﬁ cant ingredient that represents cultural, spiritual, and ethical consciousness of 
the individual. The very signiﬁ cant teaching both in early and Theravāda Buddhism is the Rebirth 
consciousness. As it is mentioned in the Visuddhimagga, individuals possess desire, hatred, deluded, 
faithful, intelligent and speculative characters in this present life due to the Rebirth consciousness. 
This resultant consciousness brings various behavioral patterns and thinking patterns that belong 
to previous existences (pu ṇabbhava). The Visuddhimagga says “Apparently one of greedy 
temperaments has formerly had plenty of desirable tasks and gratifying works to do, or has reappeared 
here after dying in a heaven. And one of hating temperament has formerly had plenty of stabbing and 
torturing and brutal works to do or has reappeared after dying. And one of deluded temperament has 
formerly drunk a lot of intoxicants and neglected hearing and questioning, or has reappeared here 
after dying in the animal existence. It is in this way that they have their source in previous habit”. 
It is very evident that the author gives an ethical analysis of individual regarding their previous 
cultural, spiritual, sociological conditions. The analysis of mental dispositions preoccupied by 
previous habits and their relevance to present problematic behaviors and to mental disorder is a very 
unique teaching in the ﬁ eld of psychotherapy revealed by Theravāda Buddhism.15
Infl uences of the Four Elements and the Three Humors as 
Physical causes to Various Problematic and Psychiatric Disorders
As it is discussed in the Visuddhimagga, the physical elements of individual are formed with 
the help of earth (paṭhavi) water (āpo), ﬁ re (tejo) and wind (vāyo).16 And on the other hand it is very 
clearly explained here that the proper function of the physical body exists on the equilibrium of three 
humors known as phlegm, wind, and bile. The imbalance of these four elements and three humors 
13  The mind in Early Buddhism, Bh. Thích minh Thánh, New Delhi, 201, PP,145,149.
14  A ṅguttara Nikāya,i. Pali Text Society, p. 149: He who is overwhelmed by hatred plans to his own harm, to the heart 
of others to the harm of both. He performs immoral acts in deed, words and thought, He cannot understand, as it really 
is his own proﬁ t, that of others, or that of both hatred is the cause of blindness, of not seeing, of not knowing. of loss of 
understanding: it is associated with trouble and does not leaf to Nibbāna.
15  Visuddhimagga Tr. by Bhikkhu Ñ ānamoli , Taipei,Taiwan, R. O. C, 1956,  pp. 104,105.
16  Visuddhimagga Tr. by Bhikkhu Ñ ānamoli , Taipei,Taiwan, R. O. C, 1956,   xi, pp. 380, 384  
Whatever is “caracterised by hard ness” (thaddha lakkh ạna) is the Earth or solid Element; by cohesion ( ābandhana) 
or ﬂ uidity, the water – Element: heating (parip ācanal) the ﬁ re or heat Element: by “strengthening” or “supporting” 
(vitthambhana) the wind or motion- Element. All four are present in every material object, though in vaying degrees of 
strength. If, for instance. The Earth Element predominates, the material object is called ‘solid’ etc.
Kammic Infl uences as a Crucial Ingredient of Psychopathology
Infl uences of the Four Elements and the Three Humors as 
Physical causes to Various Problematic and Psychiatric Disorders
76
Conference
are conducive to problematic behaviors and psychiatric disorders.17 It is said in the Visuddhimagga 
“then a person is of deluded temperament because two elements are prominent, that is to say the earth 
element and ﬁ re element. He is of heating temperament because the other two elements are prominent. 
But he is of greedy temperament recourse all four are equal. And as regards the humors, one of 
greedy temperament has phlegm in excess and one of deluded temperament has wind in excess 
or one of deluded temperament has phlegm in excess and one of greedy temperament has wind in 
excess. So they have their sources in the elements and the humors they say.” 18 According to 
the above mentioned expositions, it in very obvious that the psychiatric perspective of Visuddhimagga 
is very comprehensive. A part from that biological and the psychological causes have been highly 
concerned here in the context of psychopathology.
Personality and Character Analysis
According to the psychology of Visuddhimagga, individual means a psychophysical causal 
process which is analytically explained as the ﬁ ve aggregates (khandha), the twelve bases (āyatana), 
the eighteen elements (dhātu) and is synthetically discussed in the formula of conditioned genesis 
(paṭiccasamuppāda) as an ever changing and mutually conditioned series of phenomena.19 Concerning 
the early Buddhist expositions, Ven. Buddhaghosa explains that the combination of psychophysical 
causal existence comes as a whole, as an individual. But according to this analytical and synthetic 
explanations, it is emphasized that no any permanent or everlasting existence in this transitory world 
that could be known as soul. The axiom of Tilakkha ṇa is also utilized here to avoid the delusive 
permanency of individual and any kind of permanent soul (anatta). Commentator Buddhaghosa, 
following early Buddhist teachings of the ﬁ ve aggregates (khandha), the twelve bases ( āyatana) 
and the eighteen elements (dh ātu) illustrate that, in the process of personality development, 
the psychological existence represented by the term n āma must be developed signi ﬁ cantly than 
physical concern. Quoting Āhāra Sutta, the commentator emphasizes here that when edible food is 
provided to physical existence, three types of food known as phassāhāra, manosaṃcetanikāhāra and 
viññāṇāhāra should be provided for the existence of the mentality. These three foods do not represent 
the edible foods but totally mental. 20 Though Early and Ther āvada Buddhist teachings accept 
the interaction of these physical and mental elements, the predominant place is given to the existence 
of mentality and its development as a means of everlasting solution to every human predicament. 
This is a theory of paramount importance, both in early Buddhism and in Therav āda Buddhism 
because it is very impossible to eliminate every human problem in the absence of the proper mental 
development. Therefore, in the analysis of personality development, the mental development is much 
more highly emphasized than the physical nourishment. This mental transformation is discussed 
here as the one and only way that could be adopted to prevent every kind of human predicament.
In the Therav āda Buddhist exposition, the knowledge of physical age and the objectives 
related to relevant physical age are very helpful to understand the personality and its various 
disorders. The entire human lifespan is discussed in the kammatthānaniddesa. The lifespan of every 
individual is of tenfold. They are as follows:
17  Ibid  iii, p. 80.
18  Ibid  iii, pp. 79,81.
19  Ibid  xv, pp. 552, 558
20   Visuddhimagga Tr. by Bhikkhu Ñ ānamoli , Taipei,Taiwan, R. O. C, 1956,   xi, pp. 372, 374.
Personality and Character Analysis
77
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
• Childhood (ma ņda, 1 -10)
• Adolescence (kidd ā, 10 - 20)
• Adulthood (va ṉṉa, 20 - 30)
• The period of the establishment of mundane life (bala, 30, 40)
• The period of wisdom (paññ ā, 40, 50)
• The period of physical decay (h āyana, 50, 60)
• The period of distortion of physical body (pabb āra, 60, 70)
• The period of having crooked body (va ṇka, 70, 80)
• The period of mental distortion (momuha, 80 - 90)
• The period of occurring death (sayana, 90, 100) 21
According to above mentioned exposition, it is apparently proved that the Therav āda aim 
of providing counseling and psychotherapeutic knowledge to present world is not limited to certain 
period of life, but to the entire life span of the human being.
Six character types discussed in Visuddhimagga give a signi ﬁ cant value in understanding 
their various behavioral and thinking patterns. Each six characters can be distinguished from others, 
in terms of ﬁ ve points. As mentioned in the Visuddhimagga: desire (r āga), hatred (dosa), deluded 
(moha), faithful (saddhā), intelligent (buddhi), and speculative (vitakka) characters can be known 
with reference to their different types of postures, actions, eating patterns, modes of seeing and with 
their various mental states.22
Problematic Behaviors and Psychiatric Disorders 
According to the Six Characters
Out of six characters, faithful and intelligent characters are considered as healthy. But other 
four characters possess various problematic behaviors and psychiatric disorders. The very signiﬁ cant 
point that should be mentioned here is every problematic and mental disorder is again subdivided 
into very subtle categories. But it is very difﬁ cult to mention them all. Hence, abstract form of them 
is discussed here.23
21  Dr. Wasantha Priyadarshana (edited by: Dr. Dion Peoples): “The Buddhist Concept of Conﬂ ict Resolution (An Approach 
To Global Recovery Through Mental Well-Being), inside: Global Recovery: The Buddhist Perspective, for the 7th United 
Nations Day of Vesak Conference, 2010, pp. 711, 712
22  Guide through Visuddhimagga,  V . Dhammaratana, Sri lanka, 1964, pp. 34-36: The temperaments may be ascertained 
with reference to ﬁ ve points. They have been stated in the following gath ā: “iriyapathato kicc ā bhojan ādassanādito 
dhammappavattitoceva cariyāyo vibhāvaye”  The temperaments may be known with relevance to posture, action, eating, 
seeing etc, and the mental states, For more details please see Visaddhimagga, III chapter, from pages 106-112.
23  Dr. Wasantha Priyadarshana (edited by: Dr. Dion Peoples): “The Buddhist Concept of Conﬂ ict Resolution (An Approach 
To Global Recovery Through Mental Well-Being), inside: Global Recovery: The Buddhist Perspective, for the 7th United 
Nations Day of Vesak Conference, 2010, pp. 711, 712
Problematic Behaviors and Psychiatric Disorders 
A di t th Si Ch t
78
Conference
Unhealthy Characteristics Possessed by Desire Character (rāga)
• Hallucinatory habits (m āyā)
• Fraudulent taxies (s ātheya)
• Pride in all actions
• Delight in sinful actions (p āpicchatā)
• Unlimited desires (mahicchat ā)
• Unsatisfactoriness (asantutthit ā)
• Deep rooted de ﬁ lements in every action (siṉga)
• Vacillation in duties (c āpalya)
• Not tearing of any sinful actions (anottappa)
• Shamefulness in any sinful action (ahirika)
• Infatuated mood in any functions (mado)
• Unconscious mind (pam āta)
Unhealthy Characteristics Possessed by Deluded Character (moha)
• Sloth and torpor in physical and mental performances (th īnmiddha)
• Restlessness (uddhacca)
• Scrupulousness
• Uneasiness of after doing actions
• Skeptical doubts (vicikicch ā)
• Dogmatism
Unhealthy Characteristics Possessed by Hatred Character (dosā)
• Provocativeness in day to day life patterns
• Imbalance of controlling hatred (upan āha)
• Covering others good qualities (makkha)
• Comparing one’s good qualities with himself (pal āsa)
• Intolerance of other wealth and progress (issa)
• Hiding his wealth from the others
Unhealthy Characteristics Possessed by Hatred Character (dosā)
Unhealthy Characteristics Possessed by Deluded Character (moha)
Unhealthy Characteristics Possessed by Desire Character (rāga)
79
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Unhealthy Characteristics Possessed by Speculative Character (vitakka)
• Excessive talkativeness
• Fondness for society
• Dislike for wholesome practices
• Unsettled in all his doings
• By height he broods over what to do next day
• By day he carries out last height’s plans.
• Aimless rushing about.
Treatment Theories
As discussed in the analysis of Psychopathology, individuals vary from each other due to 
their biological, Psychological, ethical, spiritual and cultural states. In the process of prescribing 
meditative subjects (kammaṭṭhānas) for six characters, these differences are highly concerned here. 
As an eminent Psychiatrist, commentator Buddhaghosa prescribes in the Visuddhimagga very 
signiﬁ cant treatments regarding the effects from biological, sociological, ethical, cultural and 
psychological status of each six characters.24 Since, there was a highly propagated indigenous medical 
science; Ven. Buddhaghosa has merely mentioned few treatments regarding the biological conditions. 
And on the other hand his main aim was not to discuss biological background of individual but to 
discuss and provide the knowledge that could be adopted to behavioral and cognitive transformation 
as the deﬁ nite solution for every human predicament. That is the understanding of the things as they 
are or which is known as paññā (wisdom) 
But in this very limited biological analysis, the value of keeping in touch with the balance 
of three humors 25 has been well explained, And in the second step, the value of having suitable 
diet which helps to keep four elements in a healthful condition which can keep the body free from 
Physical problems is discussed. According to the early Buddhist expositions, this physical wellbeing 
of individual is conducive to achieve healthful mentality. 26 Taking these signi ﬁ cant factors into 
consideration, Ven. Buddhaghosa mentions some biological treatments in order to attain mental 
wellbeing.27 But in the entire content of Visuddhimagga, Ven. Buddhaghosa gives much more priority 
to ethical, spiritual, and psychological treatments more than biological treatments, providing more 
concerns to ethical background which is directly connected with causes of problematic behaviors 
and psychiatric disorders. Ritualistic performances full of psychotherapeutic values like pilgrimages, 
worshiping Buddha statues, and charity (dāna) are advocated as ethical treatments. In course of time, 
having understood the Psychotherapeutic signiﬁ cance of these ritualistic performances, Astrology 
24  Vimuttimagga and Visuddhimagga, A comparative Study, Bapat, P.V . Poona, 1937, pp. 35, 36
25  Visuddhimagga Tr. by Bhikkhu Ñ ānamoli , Taipei, Taiwan, R. O. C, 1956,   pp. 104, 105
26  The Dhammapada, N ārada, Sri lanka, 2000 p. 177: “ārogyaparamālābhā san tu ṭṭhi parama ṃdhanaṃ 
vissāsapuramāñati nibbānaṃ paramaṃ sukhaṃ”  Health is the highest gain. (Contentment is the greatest wealth. The trust 
is the best kinsmen Nibbāna is the highest bliss.  Therefore, it is very evident that without this psychical health the attainment 
of Nibbāna known as the highest mental purity is impossible.
27  Ibid    III, pp. 110, 111.
Treatment Theories
Unhealthy Characteristics Possessed by Speculative Character (vitakka)
80
Conference
came into being as a salient feature of Sri Lankan Psychotherapy.28 Previous causes (pubbāciṇṇa – 
nidāna) are also given a signiﬁ cant place in Visuddhimagga as a central fact which is conducive to 
various mental problems.29 Therefore, with an idea of minimizing this kammic effects or previous 
causes, moral discipline (s īla) is recommended here as a therapeutic means. It is said that, by 
practicing moral discipline one can change some undesirable behavior patterns connected with 
previous causes.30 In order to change wrong thinking patterns and the cognitions which cause many 
psychiatric disorders and problematic behaviors, meditation 31 full of psychotherapeutic values is 
advocated in the Visuddhimagga as the sole solution for every human predicament. The above 
mentioned treatment process is further elaborated here in terms of sevenfold puri ﬁ cation (satta- 
visuddhiyo): (i) puriﬁ cation of virtue (s īla – visuddhi), (ii) puri ﬁ cation of mind (citta – visuddhi), 
(iii) puri ﬁ cation of views (di ṭṭhi – visuddhi),(iv) puri ﬁ cation of conquest of doubts (ka ṇkhā - 
vitaraṇa – visuddhi), (v) puri ﬁ cation of knowledge and insight into the right and wrong path 
(maggāmagga - ñāṇadassana – visuddhi), (vi) Puri ﬁ cation of knowledge and insight into progress 
(patipadāñanadassana – visuddhi). (vii) Puri ﬁ cation of knowledge and insight into the noble path 
(ñaṇadassana – visuddhi). It has to be noted here that the ﬁ rst and the second puri ﬁ cations are 
represented by s īla and sam ādhi and the last ﬁ ve by paññ ā; and the transformation of thinking 
patterns is aimed at the ﬁ rst and the second puriﬁ cations. But much emphasis is given to cognitive 
development with the last ﬁ ve puri ﬁ cations.32 When a client is directed along with these seven 
puriﬁ cations, he or she is able to prevent the above mentioned problems with different levels. These 
different kinds of therapeutic levels are elaborated in terms of ﬁ ve steps: (i) Overcoming by Repression 
(vikkhaṃbhana – pah āna), (ii) Overcoming by the opposite (tada ṇgapahāna), (iii) Overcoming 
by tranquillization (pa ṭipassaddhi – pah āna), (iv) Overcoming by Escape (nissara ṇa – pah āna), 
(iv) Overcoming by Destruction (samuccheda – pahāna)33
Relevance to Mental Health Prophylaxis
The above mentioned therapeutic theories have been well discussed with several practical 
strategies. They are as follows. 
• Practice of s īla for behavioral modiﬁ cation.
• Practice of Ascetic Practices (dhuta ṅgas) for minimizing unlimited desires
• Understanding impediments (palibodhas) and leaving them in order to achieve clam 
environment.
• Meeting a suitable spiritual preceptor as a psychotherapist or psychologist counselor.
28  See for more details, A celebration of demons (Exorcism and the Aesthetics of healing in Sri Lanka) Kapferer, Bruce, 
Bloomington, 1983.
29  Visuddhimagga, pp. 35,36
30  Guide through Visuddhimagga, pp. 1, 13.
31  Psychotherapeutic signi ﬁ cances of Buddhist meditation, including the aspects of both samatha (tranquility) and 
vipassanā (insight) have been well discussed by several scholars. For more detailed discussion read, Carrington, P. (1984) 
Modern forms of meditation. In R.L wool folk and P.M. Lethers (Eds), Principles and Practice of Stress Management 
New York: Guilford press, Carrington, P. (1987) managing meditation in clinical practice. In M.A, west (Ed) The Psychology 
of Meditation, Oxford: Clarendon press. 
32  For detailed discussion of Satta Viuddhi please see, Guide through Visuddhimagga written by Dhammaratana ,v.
33  Buddhist Dictionary, Nyanatiloka. Singapore,  p. 121
Relevance to Mental Health Prophylaxis
81
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
• Keeping a good therapeutic relationship between the spiritual preceptor and the candidate.
• Following suitable meditative objects (kamma ṭṭhānas) prescribed by the spiritual 
preceptor. There are 40 kammaṭṭhānas. The following kammaṭṭhānas have been suggested 
for the temperaments concerned:
• 
Temperaments Kamma ṭṭhānas
desire (rāga ) Ten unpleasant objects (asubh ās) and mindfulness with regard to 
the Body.
hatred (dosa) Four sublime abodes (brahmavih āras) and four vaṇṇakasinās.
deluded (moha) Mindfulness on in and out breathing ( ānāpānasati)
faithful (saddhā) Six kinds of Recollection (anussati) (recollection of the Buddha, 
Doctrine, his noble disciples, of morality, liberality, Heavenly beings.
intelligent (buddhi) Reollection of Death (mara ṇānussati, Recollection of the peace of 
nibbāna (upasamānussati) Analysis of the four Elements 
(catudhātuvavatthāna) 
speculative (vitakka) Mindfulness on in and out breathing ( ānāpānasati)
Nibbāna, the ultimate goal of Buddhism is to be attained with aid of a continuous practice 
focused on behavioral and cognitive transformation. One of strategies suggested by Buddhism in 
order to achieve behavior modiﬁ cation is moral discipline or moral culture. Providing high threshold 
under the category of sīla – visuddhi (moral puriﬁ cation), Buddhaghosa explains that sīla can minimize 
and calm down three types of internal ﬁ res known as the ﬁ re of attachment (r āgaggi), the ﬁ re of 
antipathy (dosaggi) and ﬁ re of ignorance (mohagggi). These three ﬁ res cause internal burns. But 
various moral disciplines introduced to laity, monk, and novice can minimize those internal burns 
with their behavioral transformation. When a laity observes moral discipline introduced as ﬁ ve 
precepts, he or she has to safe guard his or her body, speech, and mind from unwholesome actions. 
As it is discussed in early Buddhism, killing, stealing and adultery are knows as unwholesome bodily 
actions. The unwholesome verbal actions are: back-biting, speaking harsh words and gossiping. And 
on the other hand, avarice, ill-will and false-views are known as threefold unwholesome mental 
action. At the ﬁ rst step, the particular moral disciplines known as the beginning of life of purity 
(ādhibrahmacariyakasīla) and the virtue of good behavior ( ābhisamācarikasīla) are constructed as 
a result of practicing the ﬁ ve precepts. In the code of discipline, there are certain rules which have 
a direct bearing on the social behavior of a man. And there are others which have their bearing 
on his moral conduct alone. Keeping in view these two sets of rules in the Buddhist tradition, 
a distinction has been made in the context virtue of good behavior ( ādhibrahmacariyakasila) and 
that of the beginning of life purity ( ādhisamācrikasīla), one is related to the social behavior and 
82
Conference
etiquette, while the other is related to the moral conduct. It is the observance of the latter that keeps 
the moral purity of a man. Therefore, sīla or moral conduct plays an important role as a strategy that 
could be used to change unwholesome conduct of an individual into a wholesome conduct. It is very 
evident that moral discipline that can be adopted as a self control or self development strategy in 
the ﬁ eld of mental health lies in the area of prophylaxis. There are various psychotherapeutic 
strategies scattered in the Visuddhimagga and so it is very hard to elaborate every strategy in this kinds 
of concise essay. Therefore, the relevance of Psychotherapeutic values has been brieﬂ y noted above. 
Every strategy constructed in the Visuddhimagga is expected to explain brieﬂ y at the presentation.
83
Exploring the Utilization of Buddhist Practices in Counseling 
for Two Diff erent Groups of Service Providers 
(Monks and Psychologists) in Cambodia
Khann Sareth and Tanja E Schunert1; 
Taing S Hun, Lara Petri, Lucy Wilmann, 
Vith Kimly, Judith Strasser, and Chor Sonary2
The suffering of Cambodia has been deep.
From this suffering comes great Compassion.
Great Compassion makes a Peaceful Heart.
A peaceful Heart makes a Peaceful Person.
A Peaceful Person makes a Peaceful Community.
A Peaceful Community makes a Peaceful Nation.
And a Peaceful Nation makes a Peaceful World.
May all beings live in Happiness and Peace. 
--Samdech Maha Ghosananda, Cambodia 
The above quotation sets the objective we advocate and work for in Cambodia.3 
Introductory analysis
Background and current situation:
Cambodia’s history of political unrest, socioeconomic struggle and traumatic genocide under 
the Khmer Rouges (KR) has disrupted and destroyed many grown structures of resources, such as 
the foundations of sufﬁ cient health care, education and deeper knowledge of Buddhist and Hindu, 
animistic traditional practices and cultural legacies. Normal patterns and habits of daily life have 
been torn apart and resulted in low indicators of development. Cambodia was ranked 137 th out of 
182 countries according to the United Nations Human Development Index (2009) and struggles still 
with providing a minimum of health services and standards especially in the ﬁ eld of mental health. 
1  Department of Psychology (DP), Royal University Phnom Penh (RUPP), Phnom Penh, Cambodia and German Civil 
Peace Service of GIZ (Gesellschaft fuer internationale Zusammenarbeit)
2  Transcultural Psychosocial Organization (TPO), Phnom Penh, Cambodia and German Civil Peace Service of GIZ
3  This paper presents a joint project from the Department of Psychology (DP) at the Royal University of Phnom Penh 
(RUPP) and the Transcultural Psychosocial Organization (TPO) in Cambodia. To fathom Cambodian Buddhist resources 
for psychosocial work in the face of the immense need of help regarding the upcoming trials for case 002 at the Khmer 
Rouge Tribunal interviews with eight monks in and around Phnom Penh have been conducted. From this, an ample 
literature research and discussions with different stakeholders the development of a training curriculum for monks and 
materials for the master’s program at RUPP emerged. They aim to integrate Buddhist practices and mindfulness skills and 
Western basic interviewing and counseling techniques and are presented in this paper as well. 
Introductory analysis
84
Conference
Problems such as poverty, lack of gender parity, mistrust and suppressed anger, domestic violence, 
child and sex-trafficking, substance abuse, and other issues which continue to undermine 
movements for national reconciliation, are common (Human Rights Watch, 2010; Humeniuk, Ali, 
& Ling, 2004; UNIAP, 2008; van de Put & Eisenbruch, 2002). Preliminary results from a nationwide 
survey conducted by the Department of Psychology (DP) at the Royal University Phnom Penh (RUPP) 
in August 2011 show a high percentage of people worrying about their daily survival and how to pay 
back debts as well as a high incidence of aggressiveness.  Additionally, the still widespread confusion 
about and inexplicability of how these atrocities could happen and who is to blame for them seems 
to frustrate many and lead to amplifying somatic symptoms (see also: Perry, Oum, & Gray, 2007). 
In 2006 the special tribunal sponsored jointly by the United Nations and the Kingdom of 
Cambodia known formally as the “Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia” (ECCC) but 
commonly referred to as the “Khmer Rouge trials” was established to try the main responsible KR 
leaders. With the pending trials regarding case 002 at the ECCC, non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) such as the Transcultural Psychosocial Organization (TPO) are confronted with a number 
of no less than 3866 recognized civil parties that urgently need psychological preparation to prevent 
re-traumatization during the hearings. Most of these applicants come from rural areas where there 
is hardly any psychological support available. 
But help is not only urgently needed in this area, but also in the ﬁ eld of severe mental 
disorders such as psychotic disorders, which are subject to stigmatization and helpless actions of 
putting the ill into cages or on chains. Often families spend their whole savings and belongings on 
ineffective treatments without being referred to an appropriate service.
Resources in mental health:
During the Pol Pot era (1975-1979), it is estimated that approximately 2 million Cambodians 
died. Only 50 physicians out of 1,000 before 1975 survived this period, with no mental health 
professionals among them (Stewart, Yuying & Phan Chan, 2010). Furthermore another million of 
Cambodia’s population was killed during the period of civil war prior to and following the KR era 
(Berthold & Gray, 2011). The United Nations Development Program estimated in 1989 that no more 
than 300 qualiﬁ ed persons of all disciplines were left to serve the country (Bit, 1991). Cambodia 
had never developed concepts and a system of mental health care until 1993 and depression and 
trauma resulting from the long lasting civil war largely went untreated. The culture has not provided 
socially accepted ways of expressing and releasing anger and frustration supported by the belief that 
such emotions do not ﬁ t with Buddhist principles. At the same time Buddhist principles seemed to 
foster an acceptance of suffering as the expected order of life (Bit, 1991). 
In 1994 the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the University of Oslo in 
cooperation with the Ministry of Health in Cambodia initiated the ﬁ rst training of psychiatrists after 
the Khmer Rouge regime. Up to now 49 psychiatrists (11 females according to information from 
the University of Health Sciences that has set up a  training program and 45 psychiatric nurses have 
been trained and work in mental health facilities and/or private practice in Cambodia (information 
from Ministry of Health). In addition mental health care has also been integrated into primary health 
care by the Ministry of Health since 2002 with 297 trained physicians and 270 trained nurses. Mental 
85
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
health outpatients services are available at 45 out of 84 referral hospitals nationwide and at 18 out of 
967 health centers (Stewart, Yuying & Phan Chan 2010). Psychiatric education doesn’t however 
include extensive training in counseling and psychotherapeutic skills. Educational trainings 
comprising an undergraduate and master’s program are well established at the Departments of 
Psychology and Social Work at RUPP.  However psychologists are so far not often involved 
in governmental institutions such as hospital care although the Cambodia’s Ministry of Health is 
currently planning this. 
The DP at RUPP exists since 1994 and offers an undergraduate and masters program to meet 
the great need for well-trained psychologists and counselors in Cambodia’s rural and city areas. 
The vision includes setting up a cooperation-network with a wider range of governmental and 
non-governmental institutions to bundle energies and enhance sustainability and efﬁ ciency. Over 660 
students have graduated with a Bachelor’s degree in psychology from the undergraduate program 
at RUPP. Since 2008, the Department offers a Master of Arts in Clinical Psychology and Trauma 
Treatment which provides an educational environment in which graduate students can learn advanced 
concepts and principles of psychology, psychotherapy, counseling and the methods of scientiﬁ c inquiry 
into the behavior of individuals, groups and society. The goal is to train psychologists with a special 
focus on trauma/therapeutic approaches with a strong integration of traditional Cambodian cultural 
ways and forms of support. From the ﬁ rst promotion 13 students have successfully graduated with 
a master’s degree and many of them are working in private practice and as program coordinators 
and counselors in the ﬁ eld of trauma and mental health. Some have started setting up a mobile team 
serving other provinces. The second cohort of students started its studies in February of 2011. 
The department aspires to reach excellence in research and education. 
In addition to the DP at RUPP, limited clinical services are provided by some other 
organizations.  The largest number of individuals seen by NGOs is probably served by TPO.  TPO
is a well-respected local non-governmental organization founded in 1995 which provides culturally 
appropriate psychological services to Cambodian individuals, families and communities who are 
subject to long-term stress and trauma. The organization runs an outpatient clinic in Phnom Penh 
and implements several community mental health programs at community grassroots levels. 
Following a multi-disciplinary approach, TPO’s outpatient clinic in Phnom Penh includes 
psychiatrists, psychiatric nurses and clinical psychologists. The clinic offers the following services: 
counseling services, psychiatric consultations, one-time consultations and Testimonial Therapy for 
KR survivors. In 2010 TPO’s outpatient clinic provided services to 601 new clients, 61 percent of 
which were female. The number of consultations has signi ﬁ cantly increased from 591 in 2005 to 
5070 in 2010. TPO further provided 545 phone-counseling sessions and around 100 face-to-face 
counseling sessions in 2010. TPO also provides ongoing psychological and psychiatric services to 
inmates in Phnom Penh’s prisons and to victims of human trafﬁ cking. 
Several other organizations such as Social Services of Cambodia (SSC), Maryknoll, Enfants 
et Development, Pour un sourire d’enfant and the Caritas Child and Adolescent Mental Health Clinic 
(CCAMH) are providing mental health care in smaller and bigger amounts.
As almost all ﬁ fteen Cambodian and expatriate mental health professionals from a qualitative 
study on mental health care in Cambodia noted that the entire population is underserved with mental 
health services with a particular lack in treatment of children, women, rural populations, persons 
with disabilities, sex workers, street children, prisoners, and persons struggling with substance abuse 
86
Conference
one can see the importance of the work done by the above mentioned organizations  in the ﬁ eld of 
mental health in Cambodia (Stewart, Yuying & Phan Chan, 2010).
Buddhist particularities in Cambodia
Bit (1991) noted that “The merging of classical Buddhist thought with animistic and 
Brahmanist traditions produces patterns which are quite atypical of Buddhism as practiced 
elsewhere” (p. 21). This has led to a diffusion of helpful powers and arbitrariness of spiritual 
protection, further promoting the widespread fear stemming from the experience of almost total 
paralysis by fear and terror during the nameless, faceless and ever-present danger of the KR regime 
(Bit, 1991).  In addition, Cambodia has seen the merging of various different cultural in ﬂ uences 
from India, China, Thailand, Lao and France which has proceeded without an in depth adaptation 
(or rejection) of previous beliefs and thus has resulted in a co-existence of partly contradictory norms 
and values. A habit to submerge deep differences inside surface similarities has emerged and in turn, 
has led to a subsequent loss of the capacity to analytically connect theory with outcome, actively 
make choices and has increased the readiness to trust in and (in psychological terminology) “identify 
with the oppressor” in Cambodia (Bit, 1991). Theravada Buddhism in Cambodia has developed in 
a somewhat isolated vacuum with hardly any ties to developments in other Buddhist countries. In 
this process other inﬂ uences have partly offset the ascetic requirements for laity and strict concepts 
and principles of traditional Buddhism.  “Buddhism has been used by every ruler in the modern 
times, from Sihanouk, Lon Nol to Pol Pot and the present regime to legitimize their political control. 
In the process, the integrity of Buddhist principles as the spiritual foundation of Cambodian culture 
has been sacriﬁ ced.” (Bit, 1991, p. 35).  In addition, the KR era has led to a great loss of educated 
monks and a certain discontinuity of practice.  
Cambodia’s Cultural Context in the Field of Mental Health
Approximately 85% of Cambodians live in rural areas and whilst the urban population 
becomes increasingly open to western views and concepts of psychology, mental disorders in 
the countryside are often attributed to the involvement of ancestral spirits or the Buddhist concept of 
Karma: determining the state of one’s well-being based on acts in a previous lifetime. Until recently 
there were no professional counseling services available in Cambodia. Cambodians therefore often 
seek the assistance of monks, traditional healers, kru khmer, or mediums to alleviate their symptoms 
through prayer and blessing ceremonies, healing techniques such as “coining” or “cupping”, or 
communication with ancestral spirits (Bertrand, 2005; van de Put & van der Veer, 2005; van de Put 
& Eisenbruch, 2002). Many rural Cambodians only have access to traditional modalities of healing 
(Berthold & Gray, 2011). “Monks…, with their perceived high level of moral development, often 
serve as life-long mentors to their parishioners, advising them on all matters of life decisions and 
personal behavior” (Bit, 1991, p.74). Cambodian nationals inside and outside the country have been 
found to develop several culture bound syndromes. Some examples are the “weak heart” syndrome 
(khsaoy beh doung), which resembles a mix of PTSD and panic disorder and involves the belief that 
“excessive bodily wind” causes a breakdown in functioning of the heart, caused by psychic distress 
and bodily fatigue and the “wind attack” (khyâl), which is comparable to a panic attack (Hinton et al. 
87
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
2002, Hinton & Otto, 2006, Hinton et al. 2010). Cambodia’s long history includes an authoritarian 
submissive nature, uncritical acceptance of a strong leader who takes over decisions and 
therefore an over-responsiveness to external social pressure has evolved.  Thus negotiation and com-
munication skills, active listening skills and the search for consensus seem to be underdeveloped. 
Disputes that aren’t satisfactorily resolved by power often lead to a deep sense of distrust and 
resentment that may block many future attempts at communication.
Qualities such as introspection, independent thinking, creative imagination and compassion 
are not traditionally valued and supported in the Cambodian culture, yet they inherently emerge out 
of Buddhist practice and have been discovered and utilized in many western approaches in cognitive 
behavioral therapy during the last decades.
The DP’s and TPO’s cooperation project
The idea of integrating pagodas and Buddhist monks into the mental health care systems 
emerged in the context of the psychosocial work with KR survivors in times of case 002 at the KR 
Tribunal (ECCC). TPO and its partners are not able to deal with such a high number of traumatized 
survivors. Community-based support structures are highly needed. Monks and nuns are central 
resource persons for rural, older Cambodians, but often do not have much knowledge in mental health 
and counseling. The analysis described above as well as many practical experiences at our institutions 
have brought up some important themes relevant to treating Cambodian clients. These include:
• a lack of collaboration between different stakeholders and  professions (Stewart, Yuying 
& Phan Chan, 2010) 
• an enormous lack of mental health services especially in rural areas and a missing system 
of appropriate referral for severely mentally ill
• a huge challenge to ensure psychological support for 3866 civil parties and 
the population in general during the upcoming trials in case 002 (Pham, Vinck, Balthazard 
& Hean, 2011; discussion at the workshop on “Reparation and Rehabilitation of Victims 
of Severe Human Rights Violations”, on the 20th of September 2011 by Rehabilitation 
and Research Centre for Torture Victims and TPO)
• a mentality of widespread mistrust and deep-rooted habits of keeping thoughts and 
feelings to oneself- stemming from the horrifying experiences of the past
• cultural factors impacting mental health treatments in Cambodia, including cultural norms 
against sharing private information with a stranger, avoiding “losing face”; maintaining 
social roles; cultural stigma; imbalanced hierarchy of therapeutic relationship (Stewart, 
Yuying & Phan Chan, 2010) 
• Western concepts of mental health , which often employ a biomedical approach, not 
fully applicable within a culture that often does not distinguish between the mind and 
the body, and incorporates spiritual beliefs much more into the concept of well-being
• a need to develop culturally appropriate ideas for a community mental health approach 
and a mix of “Western” and “Eastern” mental health treatment theories and techniques 
that would ﬁ t the Cambodian context” (Stewart, Yuying & Phan Chan, 2010, Hinton, 
Hinton, Eng & Choung, 2011) 
88
Conference
• monks with their perceived high morality being among the ﬁ rst to be addressed for help 
by the Cambodian population
• a wide variety and sources of helpful beliefs and practices inherent in Buddhist concepts 
of mindfulness and awareness for psychological stabilizing interventions discovered 
and utilized by many third wave cognitive behavioral psychotherapies
From these key points we derived the following hypotheses:
• There probably is an insuf ﬁ cient awareness of, and a missing connection to, the above 
mentioned Buddhist resources in the monks’ communities and in professional counselors 
and psychiatrists in Cambodia at present.
• Informing, educating and practically training these groups of possible key players in 
mental health about these resources may connect with the traditional culture in Cambodia 
and be acceptable, applicable and ﬁ tting to the Cambodian context.
• Training monks in basic mental health issues and counseling skills may help to diminish 
the huge gap between demand for help and available resources at the moment and utilize 
a potential that yet is in limited use.
• It may strengthen identity, role and self-con ﬁ dence of monks rendering them more 
competent and ﬂ exible in addressing their clients/ parish’s needs.
• It may link the Buddhist movement and society back to the worldwide Buddhist 
movements and developments.
• Master students in psychology will also be linked to culturally ﬁ tting, but also modern 
and advanced useful therapeutic skills and interventions, connecting them to the special 
situation and traditions in Cambodia.
We believe in the healing power of sharing and communicating. Our programs and curricula 
therefore focus on training master students and monks in a more balanced type of therapeutical 
relationship allowing the client to feel accepted,  respected, valued and supported, on psycho-
education and encouragement to share stories and information many Cambodian clients experience 
already as very relieving and on the development of self awareness and awareness raising practices 
derived from Buddhist practices and the so called “third wave” of cognitive behavioral therapies.  
In January 2011 the DP at the RUPP and TPO started a joint project exploring the links 
between Buddhism and Psychology/Counseling. 
Objectives:
• to uncover overlapping interests and areas of intervention and explore needs via a series 
of interviews with Cambodian monks
• to explore the use of  Buddhist practices and concepts in western psychotherapeutic 
approaches and transfer knowledge
• to ﬁ nd ways to reintroduce and strengthen communication and listening skills in 
the Cambodian society to enhance conﬂ ict resolution
89
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
• to create a training curriculum for monks on Buddhism and Counseling
• to support the empowerment of monks by a Buddhist network and encourage monks to 
engage in services such as group meditation for their parish
• to transfer knowledge about Buddhist resources for psychotherapy to Cambodian 
psychologists via a course in Buddhism and Psychology as part of the MA in Clinical 
Psychology and Trauma Treatment at RUPP (see: www.masterpsych-rupp.webs.com)
Methodology
The chapters of Methodology and Results will be divided into 3 parts: part A refers to a pilot 
study, in which Buddhist monks were interviewed, part B refers to the development of the monks’ 
training curriculum and part C refers to the development of the master’s curriculum at the DP/RUPP.
Part A:
A working group of TPO interns, the master’s coordinator and the German advisors to 
the programs at the DP at RUPP and TPO created (based on the above mentioned hypotheses) 
a qualitative semi-structured interview to explore the practices, needs and interests of monks. 
The interviews included the following topics: knowledge about mental illnesses, previous experiences, 
Buddhist ceremonies and customs, interventions and overlap with psychology. They were either 
translated into English simultaneously by a translator, or recorded, translated and later transcribed. 
The interviews with 8 monks in and around Phnom Penh were completed between 4 th and 22nd of 
February 2011 at the following pagodas: Wat Botum, Wat Choeung Ek, Touol Sangke, Wat Samrong 
Andek by DP and TPO interns and staff. The researchers explained the purpose of the study and asked 
the monk’s permission to interview him about his experience with clients, practices and interests. 
The interviews took between 45 minutes and 1.15 hours. The answers were coded and evaluated 
with a qualitative data-analysis, using Microsoft Ofﬁ ce Excel 2007. 
Part B:
After a brainstorming meeting attended by a Buddhist member from Paññāsāstra University
of Cambodia and coordinating member of  the Buddhist Coalition for Social Development (BCSD), 
that works closely with three centers (Santi Sena in Svay Rieng, Prom Vihearthor in Kah Kong, 
Samakithor in Battambang) the Alliance for Con ﬂ ict Transformation (ACT) and another major 
Buddhist network called Buddhists and Khmer Society Network (BKSN), the coordinator of 
the master’s program,  the GIZ (civil peace service of German international cooperation) advisors to 
the DP and TPO and a freelance Dutch psychologist it was agreed to create a training curriculum for 
monks which should be integrated into a wider training in peace building and conﬂ ict transformation 
already existing. This offers a good gateway for the DP and TPO to approach some people already 
aware of the broad possible areas for social engagement. 
A working group of the DP master’s coordinator and advisor and TPO staff met regularly to 
work on a curriculum for the training of monks as multipliers and distributors of basic psychological 
knowledge and practices such as listening and communication skills as well as Buddhist awareness 
and mindfulness skills with some external consultation of Buddhist players and foreign consultants. 
Further discussions of contents and structure took part via e-mail and Skype sessions.
Methodology
90
Conference
Part C:
The coordinator of the master’s program and lecturer of the future course in Buddhism and 
Psychology and the German advisor to the master’s program conducted a vast literature research on 
the topic and included their own work experience (e.g. with several years in DBT) as well as results 
of discussions with colleagues. From this they created materials in form of ﬁ gurative illustrations to 
visualize the theoretical background, roots and concepts of Buddhism and some “third wave” cognitive 
behavioral therapies. Also a collection of interesting and useful practical exercises were compiled. 
Results
Part A:
We will present the results question by question. The answers we have noted, are 
representative of the answers that the majority monks provided. 
1. What do you know about mental illness? Four out of 8 monks stated that mental 
illness occurs because of suffering related to the Khmer Rouge, as well as anger and 
revenge. Two other monks replied that mental illness is due to past traumatic events. 
A variety of explanations for mental illness were mentioned: poverty, society, economy, 
politics and war, parents, rape and sexual violence.  It is noteworthy to mention that 
some monks replied that mental illness/trauma affects people in their daily life and 
decreases their daily functioning. 
2. How does Buddhism view people with mental illness? Here monks gave 
contradictory answers. On the one side, people with mental illness cannot in ﬂ uence 
their illness, their suffering is due to Kharma and their mistakes in their past life. On 
the other side, people can inﬂ uence their lives and well-being through doing good. Then 
they will receive good things in return. It was also mentioned that there is no healing 
practice for mental illness in Buddhism. Three out of 8 monks replied that Buddhism 
sees mentally ill people as humans with a disturbed mind. 
3. Why do people come to you/What problems do they tell you about? Most people come 
to the monks in order to seek causes for their problems, they want advice and emotional 
support and want to receive a solution for their problems.  Four out of 8 monks said 
that people come to them because of relationship problems, and 3 out 8 monks replied 
that people seek advice related to alcohol problems. Other issues noted were domestic 
violence, mistakes/sins, death, birth, job problems and depression.
4. What is the role of Buddhist ceremonies in regard to mental health problems? 
The majority, 5 of 8, said that Buddhist ceremonies have an educative effect on people. 
5 out of 8 monks replied that the ceremonies, especially meditation, relieve stress and 
negative feelings, bring happiness and help to clear the mind.  Ceremonies also help 
strengthen social networks and have a transformative effect. 
5. What are the most important beliefs and customs in Buddhism? The majority of 
the monks replied that doing good (offerings, good deeds etc.) and receiving good is 
the most important belief in Buddhism. Following the 5 precepts (Do not kill, Do not steal, 
Results
91
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Do not betray your family, Do not lie, Do not drink alcohol or other drugs  as well as 
the eightfold path (right understanding, right thought, right speech, right action, right 
living, right effort, right mindfulness, right meditation) is also important in this religion.  
The water ceremony and Buddhist chanting are other important customs described. 
Further important beliefs are black magic and protective symbols, although these beliefs 
do not belong to traditional Buddhism. They are still important today, and most monks 
respect these beliefs. 
6. What kind of interventions do you offer for speci ﬁ c problems? First of all, most 
monks gave the advice to follow Buddhist principles. People with problems should 
do good things in order to receive good.  When it came to problems involving illness 
(e.g. cancer) and death (e.g. suicide, death) monks advised the people to remember 
fugaciousness (things in this world are not stable). People who are suffering should remain 
hopeful and balanced and try to work hard to achieve their goals (e.g. suicide attempt). 
7. Do you feel overwhelmed sometimes? Four out of 8 monks replied that they feel 
overwhelmed when dealing with people and their problems. 
8.  Do you have ideas how one could integrate Buddhist beliefs and customs and 
Psychology? Which ceremonies could be utilized in the ﬁ eld of mental health? 
Field of mental health: The majority of monks replied that it is important to explore 
the causes of the problem before giving advice to the person. Also, it is important to 
develop mind and consciousness, one monk replied that self-exploration for therapists 
and monks is important. Buddhist beliefs and customs: The majority of the monks said 
that following the 5 precepts is the most important belief which should be integrated 
in Psychology. 
9. Would you like to receive training to help you deal with mental illnesses? All monks 
said that they would like to receive some training. 
10. Are there speciﬁ c topics and areas related to mental health that you would like 
to know more about? The monks named the following topics of interest: loss/grief, 
counseling, psychological development, crisis management, special illnesses 
11. Do you share knowledge on this matter with other monks/with monks from other 
countries? Five out of 8 monks communicate with other monks. 
Summary and Conclusions for part A:
From this small scale survey it was found that the monks’ general knowledge concerning 
mental health is limited. Most monks did not know about speci ﬁ c disorders, although they now 
and then encounter clients with speci ﬁ c problems. All monks would be interested in receiving 
a training to gain knowledge in the ﬁ eld of mental health. Even though we only questioned 8 monks, 
the information we received was already redundant. This might lead to the conclusion, that further 
interviews may not be needed. 
The results of the interviews also show that the advice the monks give to people is restricted 
to theoretical Buddhist beliefs and the monks hand out very general advice and problem solving 
solutions. Awareness and mindfulness exercises weren’t mentioned (Hypothesis 1 was con ﬁ rmed 
92
Conference
regarding monks).  Since the monks reported that they do have people coming to them with a large 
variety of problems (e.g. alcoholism, domestic violence , depression) and also want direct advice 
and a solution for their problems, we were supported by our impression that it would be important to 
expand the monks’ knowledge regarding speciﬁ c mental disorders (e.g. depression, anxiety, alcohol 
abuse, anger management) in order to ensure in time referral to psychiatrists or counselors and also 
regarding counseling and Buddhist practice skills e.g. on mindfulness. This way they can be trained 
to give people a more personalized form of advice and help to expand general knowledge in mental 
health and save people from wasting money on inappropriate interventions.
Part B
As a result of part A the following curriculum was agreed upon by the research group for 
a training of monks: 
In order to give further insights into our Monk’s Training, Appendix A presents four of the 
images and exercises developed for the training.   
Training Objectives Topic 
¾ To provide a concept of mental health 
¾ to equip with knowledge about how to 
identify some severe mental illnesses  
¾ to equip with knowledge about how and 
where to refer clients 
¾ Signs and symptoms of:  
x Schizophrenia/Psychosis 
x Addictive disorder (Alcohol, drug, gambling) 
x Trauma Disorder 
x  Depression 
x Anxiety 
x psychosomatic disorders 
¾ Possibility of referral 
¾ Resources and risk factors for mental health 
¾ To teach the monks about basic psycho-
education on some mental health diseases 
¾ Causes of and coping strategies for psychosis, depression, 
anxiety. addictive disorders and trauma disorders  
¾ To equip the monks with basic counseling 
skills to help people with minor problems 
¾ Listening Skills 
¾ Questioning Skills 
¾ Empathy 
¾ Assessment of  problems and factors that contribute to the 
presented problem 
¾ To equip monks with skills in stabilizing 
overwhelmed and hyper-aroused clients 
Stabilization techniques: 
¾ grounding techniques 
¾ safe place/ inner helper imagination 
¾ utilization of resources 
¾ To introduce participants to Buddhist 
concepts with regards to western 
psychology 
¾ ACT (Acceptance commitment therapy) 
¾ DBT (Dialectic Behavioral Therapy) 
¾ to practically train monks how to apply 
Buddhist practices to help people 
¾ Practical exercises (Awareness, mindfulness, body scan, non-
judgmental, breathing exercise (*introduction and practice in 
between other topic) 
93
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Part B and C
As a result of extensive literature review and own experiences we present some example of 
the information developed for the training of monks and master students:
Using Mindfulness in mental health
Mindfulness is a “hot topic” in Western psychology right now - increasingly recognized 
as a powerful therapeutic intervention for everything from work stress to depression - and also as 
an effective tool for increasing emotional intelligence.
What is mindfulness?
Mindfulness is a mental state of awareness, focus, openness and curiosity- which allows you 
to engage fully in what you are doing at any moment. In a state of mindfulness, dif ﬁ cult thoughts 
and feelings have much less impact and in ﬂ uence over you - so it is hugely useful for everything 
from full-blown psychiatric illness to enhancing athletic or business performance. 
The Beneﬁ ts of Mindfulness
• to become more connected to yourself, to others and to the world around you 
• to become less judgmental 
• to increase self-awareness 
• to become less disturbed by and less reactive to unpleasant experiences 
• to learn the distinction between you and your thoughts 
• to learn that everything changes, thoughts and feelings come and go like weather 
• to have more balance, less emotional volatility 
• to develop self-acceptance and self-compassion
94
Conference
Part C
The following presents an example from the curriculum for Master Students at the DP/RUPP:
How Mindfulness can potentially help traumatized clients
Discussion
The project described in this paper is an ongoing process. The start of the implementation 
of the developed curriculum for master students is taking place in November 2011. The implementation 
of the training for monks will start with a pilot phase conducted by TPO staff and following further 
implementation with help from master psychology students. The experiences we will gather then will 
lead to further adjustments and ﬁ ne-tuning of the trainings to best meet the needs of the two target 
groups (monks and psychology master students). The DP at RUPP and TPO are planning further 
evaluation and continuous improvement of this project.
Many factors have been found to contribute to mental health problems in Cambodia. Among 
these are an historically grown willingness to blindly accept authority, leaving little space for 
self-development and feelings of self-efﬁ ciency, a massive burden of past atrocities during the KR 
regime that’s known as one of the most destructive and harmful experiences in 20th century besides 
the Holocaust (Bertold & Gray, 2011, Boehnlein &Kinzie, 2011), the following struggle to ﬁ nd justice 
and reconcile and the impact on social society and infrastructure with an enormous percentage of 
poor people. On top of the immense psychological needs and demands resources in mental health 
are very scarce again partly due to the extinction of intelligentsia during the KR period.
Facing this situation and the fact that Cambodian concepts and beliefs regarding mental 
health are greatly differing from the west, a search for useful alternatives was undertaken by the DP 
at RUPP and TPO. This led to the idea of resurrecting, spreading and utilizing Buddhist mindfulness 
and awareness concepts in addition to other simple counseling tools in order to advocate general 
mental well-being, self-awareness, compassion and self-esteem and thus prevent and alleviate mental 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discussion
95
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
illness respectively. Simultanously this offered the opportunity to train monks, a group already 
commonly approached by Cambodians for help in the field of mental health, as possible 
“multipliers” or distributers of knowledge and utilize this extensive cultural resource.
Another study interviewing Buddhist monks in a large Cambodian community in the United 
States about their perspectives on anger regulation similarly revealed the frequent approach of 
monks by community members regarding psychological problems and identiﬁ ed Buddhist practices 
as possible helpful contributions to mental health (Nickerson & Hinton, 2011) The monks in this 
study advise the use of Buddhist teachings, meditation/mindfulness, herbal medications and holy 
water to relieve clients from anger.
Our pilot study con ﬁ rmed the need of training for monks which generally felt a lack of 
preparedness to offer adequate help and response to their clients. The knowledge and application of 
practical mindfulness and awareness skills amongst Cambodian monks especially in contact with 
clients seems nearly non-existent in spite of great potential bene ﬁ t. For example the propagation 
and broader circulation of mindfulness skills by monks via meditation groups could help to stabilize 
the Cambodians mental health and foster psychological well-being. Further development of this 
project will show whether the planned training will be welcomed and reach the expected effects or not. 
Follow up trainings and supervision groups shall be established if the project shows positive results. 
96
Conference
Appendix A:  Exercises and images developed for training of the monks. 
An example deriving from DBT: 
Affective modulation to enhance emotional
awareness and and the regulation feelings
• train to communicate about feelings
• start with positive everyday feelings
• there are no wrong or right feelings
• feelings are ok, they are no actions and not harmful
• encourage verbalization of feelings
• train to recognize when one is starting to feel distressed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A:  Exercises and images developed for training of the monks. 
97
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Exercises
The exercises designed and/or selected for the training course come from various Buddhist 
sources as well as other materials developed for trainings in basic counseling and interviewing skills.  
In Table 1 we present some of the exercise titles:
Table 1.  Training exercises used in the training of monks and master’s course.
Source Name of exercise(s)
Thich Nath Hanh reincarnation candle image, the elements in our body, 
grounding touching the earth with ancestors, peace contract, 
compassion for self and others, delusion story
DBT letting go of emotional suffering, radical acceptance
ACT ACT explanation ﬂ ipchart role-play, Just noticing exercise, 
Journaling continuous reactions
A. Berzin self-re ﬂ ection on sensitivity, quiet the mind, sensitive 
communication
Cordova conscious breathing
Counseling and listening 
skills developed by our 
institutions  
role-play: attending and listening skills characteristics of 
effective counseling, self-experience, self-reﬂ ection, trust 
building group exercises
98
Conference
References
Berzin A. (2011)  DEVELOPING BALANCED SENSITIVITY , Practical Buddhist Exercises for 
Daily Life www.berzinarchives.com (retrieved 20.08.2011)
Berthold S. M. & Gray, G. (2011) Post-Traumatic stress reactions and secondary trauma Effects at 
tribunals: The ECCC example.  In Van Schaak B., Reicherter D., Youk C. (Eds.) Cambodia’s 
Hidden Scars: Trauma Psychology In The Wake Of The Khmer Rouge, Documentation 
Series No 17 – Documentation Center of Cambodia (www.dccam.org) 
Bertrand, D. (2005). The therapeutic role of Khmer mediums (kru boramei) in contemporary 
Cambodia. Mental Health, Religion & Culture , 309-327
Boehnlein J. K. & Kinzie J. D. (2011) The Effect Of The Khmer Rouge On The Mental Health Of 
Cambodia And Cambodians. In Van Schaak B., Reicherter D., Youk C. (Eds.) Cambodia’s 
Hidden Scars: Trauma Psychology In The Wake Of The Khmer Rouge, Documentation 
Series No 17 – Documentation Center of Cambodia (www.dccam.org) 
Bit, S. (1991). The Warrior Heritage: A psychological perspective of Cambodian trauma.  El Cerrito, 
CA: Seanglim Bit (self-published). 
Cordova, N., Keep Your Eyes on the Moment- A lesson in mindfulness for Rohatsu, including tips 
for beginners.  Retrieved from http://www.beliefnet.com/Faiths/Buddhism/2004/12/Keep-Your-
Eyes-On-The-Moment.aspx?p=2 , October, 7th 2011
Hinton, S., Hinton, D., Um, K., Chea, A., & Sak, S. (2002). The Khmer ‘Weak Heart’ syndrome: 
Fear of death from palpitations. Transcultural Psychiatry , 323-344.
Hinton D., Otto M. (2006). Symptom Presentation and Symptom Meaning Among Traumatized 
Cambodian Refugees: Relevance to a Somatically Focused Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 
13(4) Cognitive and Behav. Prac. 249
Hinton D., Pich V ., Marques L., Nickerson A., & Pollack M. (2010). Khyâl attacks: A key idiom 
of distress among traumatized Cambodian refugees.  Cultural Med. Psychiatry, 34(2), 244.  
Hinton D., Hinton A., Eng, K-T., & Choung S. (2011). PTSD Severity And Key Idioms Of Distress 
Among Rural Cambodians: The Results Of A Needs Assessment Survey. In Van Schaak 
B., Reicherter D., Youk C. (Eds.)., Cambodia’s Hidden Scars: Trauma Psychology In The 
Wake Of The Khmer Rouge, Documentation Series No 17 – Documentation Center of 
Cambodia (www.dccam.org)
Human Rights Watch. (2010). “Skin on the Cable”: The Illegal Arrest, Arbitrary Detention and 
Torture of People Who Use Drugs in Cambodia. Washington, D.C.: Human Rights Watch.
Humeniuk, R., Ali, R., & Ling, W. (2004). Substance use and treatment options in Cambodia. Drug 
and Alcohol Review , 365-367.
Mc Cay, M., Wood, J.C., Brantley, J., (2007) The dialectical behavior therapy skills workbook- 
practical DBT Exercises for Learning Mindfulness, interpersonal Effectiveness, Emotion 
Regulation &Distress Tolerance, Oakland: New Harbinger
References
99
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Nickerson A., & Hinton, D. (2011). Anger regulation in traumatized Cambodian refugees: 
The perspectives of Buddhist monks, Cultural Medical Psychiatry 35, 396–416.
Perry, C. T., Oum, P., & Gray, S. H. (2007). The body remembers: Somatic symptoms in traumatized 
Khmer. Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis and Dynamic Psychiatry , 
77-84.
Pham, P. Vinck, P.  Balthazard, M., & Hean, S. (2011).  After the ﬁ rst trial: A population based survey 
on knowledge and perception of justice and the extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of 
Cambodia. Published report.  Berkley, CA: Human Rights Center, June.
Stewart, J., Yuying T., & Phan Chan, P. (2010). Mental Health in Cambodia: A Qualitative Evaluation.  
Unpublished report by the International Organization for Migration (IOM), Pepperdine 
University, and the Royal University of Phnom Penh (not published so far)
Thich Nath Hanh, (2004), Jeden Augenblich genießen. Übungen zur Achtsamkeit, Berlin: 
Theseus Verlag.
UNIAP. (2008, March). SIREN human traf ﬁ cking data sheet. Retrieved August 24, 2010, from 
United Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human Traf ﬁ cking: http://www.no-traf ﬁ cking.
org/reports_docs/cambodia/datasheet_cambodia_march08.pdf
United Nations Development Program. (2009). Human development report. Retrieved August 24, 
2010, from http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/country_fact_sheets/cty_fs_KHM.html
van de Put, W., & Eisenbruch, M. (2002). The Cambodian Experience. In J. de Jong, Trauma, War and 
Violence: Public Mental Health in Socio-Cultural Context (pp. 93-156). New York: Kluwer 
Academic/Plenum Publishers.
van de Put, W., & van der Veer, G. (2005). Counselling in Cambodia: Cultural competence and 
contextual costs. Intervention , 87-96.
100
Narrative Exposure Therapy (NET):
Culturally Sensitive Trauma Treatment for 
Khmer Rouge Survivors
Judith Strasser1, Dr. Sotheara Chhim2
and Sopheap Taing3
Introduction
In Cambodia, pragmatic, community-based and culturally sensitive trauma treatment 
approaches are needed in order to assist survivors of mass atrocity and civil war. Narrative Exposure 
Therapy is a short-term trauma treatment approach deriving from Cognitive Behavior Therapy and 
Testimony Therapy. The Transcultural Psychosocial Organization Cambodia (henceforth ‘TPO’) 
has been developing a cultural adapted version of Narrative Exposure Therapy by integrating 
Buddhist and traditional practices. In 2010, a treatment study was conducted aiming at evaluating 
the efﬁ cacy of the original Narrative Exposure Therapy version and the newly developed culturally 
adapted approach in post con ﬂ ict Cambodia. 75 Khmer Rouge survivors, who presented with 
posttraumatic stress symptoms, were offered and accepted participation in the treatment study. Both 
approaches demonstrate a signi ﬁ cant reduction in posttraumatic stress symptoms and depression 
scores, but TPO’s cultural adapted approach proved to be more effective as evidenced in a steeper 
decline in Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) symptoms relative to the original Narrative 
Exposure Therapy counterpart. The results indicate that the integration of religious and cultural 
practices and rituals is an important element in the process of meaning making and coping with loss 
and trauma in Cambodia’s spirit-based culture.
Background
Modern Cambodian history has seen some of the worst horrors of the 20th century. After 
becoming embroiled in the international con ﬂ ict in Indochina Cambodians experienced appalling 
atrocities committed by the Khmer Rouge genocidal regime from 1975 to 1979. The Khmer Rouge 
communist leaders turned Cambodia into a killing ﬁ eld where nearly 2 millions Cambodians, fully 
one quarter of the population, were killed or died by execution, starvation, exhaustion from forced 
labor, malnutrition and torture. 4 Hundreds of thousands ﬂ ed across the border into neighboring 
Thailand. The Khmer Rouge (henceforth ‘KR’) imposed radical social transformations to Cambodians 
traditional society and dismantled people from their spirit-based culture contributing to mental 
health disorders as people were not allowed to address monks as resource persons and as families, 
1  Senior Advisor of the Civil Peace Service “Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit” (GIZ) and 
Transcultural Psychosocial Organization Cambodia 
2  Managing Director, Transcultural Psychosocial Organization Cambodia
3  Research Assistant, Transcultural Psychosocial Organization Cambodia
4  Chandler, D. (1998). The Burden of Cambodia’s Past. In Frederick Z. Brown & David G. Timberman (Eds.), Cambodia 
and the International Community: The Quest for Peace, Development, and Democracy (pp. 33-47). New York: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Background
Introduction
101
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
the main social units in Cambodia that offer emotional support, were viciously attacked and 
supplanted by collectives. Many Cambodians refer to the period of Democratic Kampuchea as 
“the regime of three years, eight months and twenty days”, as if every single moment of that period 
has been permanently seared into their memories.
Brutal and arbitrary executions carried out by KR cadres against perceived subversive 
elements or during purges of their own ranks between 1976 and 1978 are considered to have 
constituted genocide. The Khmer Rouge government arrested, tortured and eventually executed 
anyone suspected of belonging to several categories of supposed “enemies”, e.g. anyone with 
connections to the former or with foreign governments, intellectuals (in practice this included almost 
everyone who could read and write), ethnic Vietnamese, Chinese, minorities in the eastern highlands, 
Cambodian Christians, Muslims and Buddhist monks. Beside the well-known torture center S-21 
in Phnom Penh, where app. 14.000 persons lost their lives, security centers were widespread across 
the rest of the country. The Documentation Center of Cambodia lists up at least 195 documented 
torture and death centers5. 
In recent years, reconstruction efforts have progressed and some political stability has 
returned. However, despite signiﬁ cant assistance from bilateral and multilateral donors, the devastation 
wrought by the KR regime continues to haunt the country and paralyze its development efforts. 
The population of Cambodia is 14.8 million (UN, 2005) and gross national income per capita is 
US$380 (World Bank, 2006). Measured by both income and broader human development indicators, 
Cambodia is among the poorest countries in the world, e.g. it ranks 121 of 162 countries in the world 
on the human development index, lower than Myanmar, Indonesia and Vietnam.
The high level of exposure to war trauma affected Cambodia’s population on multiple 
levels. A recent population-based study by Sonis demonstrates that 14% of Cambodians over 18 
years suffer from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)6, whereas de Jong estimates that two out 
of ﬁ ve Cambodians suffer from mild to severe mental and psychological problems7.
On 30 March 2009, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (henceforth 
‘ECCC’) commenced its ﬁ rst trial in the case against Kaing Guek Eav, alias Duch. The ECCC, also 
known as the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, is a hybrid international tribunal established in 2006 to try 
senior leaders of the KR and those who were most responsible for “the crimes and serious violations 
of Cambodian penal law, international humanitarian law and custom, and international conventions 
recognized by Cambodia, that were committed during the period from 17 April 1975 to 6 January 
1979.”8
In contrast to other international tribunals, the ECCC offer a unique and unprecedented 
mechanism for victims to participate directly in the proceedings as Civil Parties. The Civil Party 
mechanism gives key bene ﬁ ciaries of ECCC proceedings – the victims – direct access to justice 
5  http://www.dccam.org/Database/Geographic/Index.htm
6  Sonis, J. et al. (2009). Probable Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and Disability in Cambodia. Associations with 
Perceived Justice, Desire for Revenge and Attitudes Toward the Khmer Rouge Trials. Journal of the American Medical 
Association. V ol. 302 No.5: 527-536.
7  de Jong, J. (2002). Trauma, War and Violence. Springer
8  Royal Government of Cambodia, ‘Law on the Establishment of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia 
for the Prosecution of Crimes Committed during the Period of Democratic Kampuchea’, NS/RKM/1004/006, 27 October 
2004, available online at http://www.eccc.gov.kh/en/document/legal/law-on-eccc (last visited 12 June 2011), at Art. 1.
102
Conference
and the opportunity to present their personal experiences, views and concerns. In Case 001 90 KR 
victims have been accepted as civil parties. Their example has given rise to an enormous interest 
by KR victims to apply as Civil Parties for the upcoming Case 002. More than 3.800 KR victims 
have been recognized as Civil Parties in Case 002. 
But what effect will the trials have on survivors? Some have suggested that countrywide 
mechanisms for dealing with legacies of widespread violence, such as tribunals, may help reduce 
mental health symptoms and associated impairment. 9 However, others have suggested that trials 
may actually increase PTSD prevalence and severity by ’re-traumatizing’ survivors. As stated by 
Stover, “…one can hardly expect victims and witnesses to come to a state of ‘psychological healing’ 
after recounting a highly traumatic experience in a public setting that in and of itself might be 
threatening.”10 In his recent population-based study Sonis points out that although Cambodians have 
positive attitudes towards the trials, most were concerned that the trials would bring back painful 
memories.11 Stammel found, that KR victims, who applied as Civil Parties, experienced more traumatic 
events than other KR victims and have higher rates of PTSD symptoms. Consequently, she points 
out that psychological assistance is urgently needed, especially for those, who are participating 
actively in the tribunal’s proceedings.12 
TPO is currently the only actor providing psychological services to Civil Parties at 
the ECCC. Searching for pragmatic, effective and culturally sensitive trauma treatment methods 
for KR survivors TPO developed a culturally sensitive trauma treatment approach. The paper will 
present the approach and discuss results of a treatment study with KR trauma survivors.
Narrative Exposure Therapy (NET) – Culturally Sensitive Trauma Treatment 
for Khmer Rouge Survivors
i) Rationale for the treatment study:
In recent years research on therapy of PTSD has made a considerable progress. Cognitive 
behavioral exposure techniques have proven to be the most successful interventions in treating PTSD13. 
However, exposure techniques applied to clients suffering from traumatic stress in industrialized 
countries cannot be easily transferred to victims of mass atrocity and war. Current research emphasis 
is now more than ever being placed on developing appropriate interventions that address the needs 
of survivors experiencing a range of symptoms after trauma exposure. Given the pervasiveness of 
war and conﬂ ict-related trauma, especially in resource poor countries, interventions tailored to suit 
the circumstances of the overwhelming number of such survivors are especially in demand. However, 
treatment outcome studies in this ﬁ eld are still few.
9  Sonis, J. et al. (2009)
10  Stover, E. (2005). The Witnesses. War Crimes and the Promise of Justice in The Hague. University of Pennsylvania 
Press, Philadelphia: p. 82
11  Sonis, J. et al. (2009)
12  Stammel, N. et al. (2008). Readiness to reconcile and mental health in the context of the Khmer Rouge trials in Cambodia. 
In press.
13  Foa, E. B., & Meadows, E. A. (1997). Psychosocial treatments for posttraumatic stress disorder. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 48: pp. 449-480.
Narrative Exposure Therapy (NET) – Culturally Sensitive Trauma Treatment 
for Khmer Rouge Survivors
103
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
In Cambodia only few KR victims are able to attend counseling sessions on a regular base, nec-
essary for the application of conventional therapies. Most conventional psychological therapies 
require weekly or fortnightly attendance by the client, with a minimum length of 6 months for 
the therapy process. This is rarely possible in rural settings, where people only attend health care 
facilities that are in close proximity to their homes and do not have ﬁ nancial resources to travel 
to the capital. Given large numbers of people and limited monetary resources any psychotherapy 
that will take place must be brief and pragmatic. In addition, the method must be adaptable to 
the Cambodian cultural environment and easy for local personnel to learn. It is therefore important 
to identify short-term, community-based, culturally sensitive, psychosocial interventions, which can 
easily be implemented by mental health workers, community workers or human rights activists and 
do not require large staff numbers.
ii) Methodology
TPO uses a trauma treatment approach that was speci ﬁ cally developed for the treatment 
of posttraumatic stress resulting from organized violence: Narrative Exposure Treatment (NET).14
NET is a standardized and manualized version of the ‘Testimony Therapy’ approach ﬁ rst described 
by Lira and Weinstein (published under the pseudonyms Cienfuegos and Monelli, 1983) in Chile 
and since been tested in different socio-cultural settings.15 NET is a short-term treatment approach 
to trauma that integrates therapeutic components deriving from Cognitive Behavior Therapy and 
Testimony Therapy. The focus of the therapy procedure is twofold: As with exposure therapy, one 
goal is to reduce the symptoms of PTSD by confronting the patient with the traumatic memories. 
However, recent theories of PTSD and emotional processing also suggest that the distortion of 
the explicit autobiographic memory about traumatic events leads to a fragmented narrative of traumatic 
memories, which results in the maintenance of PTSD symptoms. 16 Thus, the reconstruction of 
autobiographic memory and a consistent narrative should be used in conjunction with exposure 
therapy. NET places a focus on both methods, that is, the habituation of emotional responding to 
reminders of the traumatic event and the construction of a detailed narrative of the event and its 
consequences.
Based on its organizational mission - to combine western and local approaches to trauma 
healing - TPO has been adapting the testimonial method by integrating traditional and religious 
practices in cooperation with local pagodas and Buddhist monks. The integration of traditional 
and religious practices - chanting of monks, blessing and puri ﬁ cation rituals, the use of protective 
strings - reﬂ ects the signiﬁ cance of traditional coping mechanisms in Cambodia’s spirit based culture. 
The worldview of individuals is shaped by the classical Theravada Buddhist doctrine and its 
understanding of Karma as much as the belief in the supra-natural world. These beliefs in ﬂ uence 
people’s responses to misfortune, poverty, psychosocial misery and mental disorder 17 and have 
implications for trauma theory and interventions. 
14  Neuner, F., Schauer, M., Elbert, T., & Roth, W. T. (2002). A narrative exposure treatment as intervention in a refugee 
camp: A case report. Journal of Behavioral and Cognitive Psychotherapy, V ol. 30: 205-20.
15  For further details on NET and publications see: http://www.vivofoundation.net/
16  Ehlers, A. & Clark, D. M. (2000). A cognitive model of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behavioral Research and 
Therapy, 38: 319–345.
17  Van de Put, A. C. M. & Eisenbruch, M. (2002). The Cambodian Experience. In: de Jong, J. (2002). Trauma, War and 
Violence. Springer, New York. 
104
Conference
In TPO’s culturally adapted NET approach, KR victims are invited to talk about their traumatic 
experiences. In cooperation with a therapist they restore their painful memories and convert them 
into a written document: a testimony. The testimony is read aloud and delivered to the survivors by 
monks from a local pagoda in a Buddhist delivery ceremony in presence of other survivors, relatives 
and/or community members. The therapeutical effect of this practice is multi-layered: The public 
delivery of the testimonies in presence of Buddhist monks, other survivors and community members 
promotes acknowledging of suffering and the de-stigmatization of victims and thereby allows 
survivors to restore their dignity. It further allows survivors to ease the suffering of the spirits 
of ancestors and to pay honor to deceased relatives. According to Buddhist beliefs, the spirits of 
deceased persons have dif ﬁ culties in transmigration from one lifetime to the next, if funeral rites 
cannot be accomplished. As most KR survivors do not know how and where their family members 
came to death, the subsequent conduction of ceremonies and offering of goods is a way to satisfy 
the demands of the spirits, so they can exert their positive inﬂ uence on the left-behind survivors.
75 Khmer Rouge survivors, who presented with high scores of posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) symptoms according to the Post Traumatic Stress Disorder Checklist (PCL-C), were offered 
and accepted participation in the treatment study. Participants were randomly assigned to either 
the original NET approach or TPO’s adapted NET version. Symptoms of PTSD (PCL-C) and 
depression (Hopkins Symptom Checklist-25; HSCL-25) were assessed prior to treatment and after 
a 3 and 6 month follow-up. Additional measures were applied to examine unresolved grief and 
continuing bonds to deceased relatives. A number of qualitative measures were used to explore 
victims’ perception of the testimony as well as the elements of the Buddhist ceremonies.
Results
Both approaches produced a signi ﬁ cant reduction in the posttraumatic symptoms and 
depression scores. However, TPO’s cultural adapted NET version proved to be more effective as 
evidenced in a steeper decline in PTSD symptoms relative to the original NET counterpart ( ﬁ nal 
quantitative results will be presented). The ﬁ ndings also demonstrate that producing and receiving 
a testimony that documents traumatic experiences is an essential element in promoting rehabilitation 
for victims of severe human rights violations. The qualitative results further indicate that coping with 
political violence is centrally linked to cultural and societal constructions of meaning. The Western 
individualistic, bio-medical approach to trauma as represented by the concept of PTSD is ill suited 
to describe suffering in Cambodia’s spirit-based culture. The continuing bonds to the ancestors 
help survivors to deal with and make sense of personal losses: “The importance of relations with 
the ancestors helps explain the suffering of people who were never able to organize for the necessary 
rituals at the death of family members. The notion of ‚making merit‘ and the effect it may have on 
the next life, as well the certainty that no deeds will remain without consequences, are important 
notions in understanding psychological problems as well as potential solutions.”18 Offering goods to 
the monks is perceived as producing merits, which are sent along to the dead in order to ease their 
suffering and to make their future existence as good as possible. As the dead are still connected to 
the living, the quality of these relationships and dynamics is essential in understanding and inﬂ uencing 
survivors’ mental well-being. Combining trauma exposure techniques with the promotion of social 
acknowledgment and the integration of religious and traditional practices seems to be a promising 
approach to address the multiple aspects of traumatization caused by political violence in Cambodia.
18  Ibid: p. 116.
Results
105
Countering Old Age Loneliness at the Electronic Temple 
Through Dhamma Counseling
Dr. Upul Priyankara Lekamge
Royal Institute of Colombo, Sri Lanka.
Introduction
One common social phenomenon regularly observed among the aged individuals in urban 
Sri Lanka has been that the interaction they increase with the media; newspapers, radio and television. 
To counter some of the aspects that are associated with modern, urban life style, the aged individuals 
seek the comfort of media. Many sociologists such as Abercrombie (1996), Carey (1989), Fiske 
(1987) and Lull (1995) have studied the effect or the relationship of media with culture to ﬁ nd out 
the effect of media on individual’s life. In this study it was studied that how the Sri Lankan urban 
Buddhists counter loneliness that is associated with their old age by using the television [electronic 
temple] in receiving Dhamma counseling. In conducting this study ﬁ fty males and ﬁ fty females from 
urban areas [Kandy and Colombo] were selected. After a preliminary literature survey, in-depth 
interviews were conducted to ﬁ nd out their world view, the type of psychological conditions that 
they experience, their ideas of Buddhist philosophy and what type of spiritual solace that they seek 
from the religious programs that are telecast in different Sri Lankan television channels. From 
a sociological perspective both functionalism and symbolic interaction theory and from the perspective 
of media the social action theory were considered. 
Discussion 
Ageing has been a critical issue in Sri Lanka like that of the global level. Jary and 
Jary (2005) de ﬁ ne ageing as ‘the chronological process of growing physically older’ (p. 8). 
The population statistics released by the Department of Statistics, Sri Lanka has shown that 
the percentage of aged people increases each year.1 World Bank and United Nations reports claim 
that Sri Lanka has continuously experiencing one of the fastest ageing populations in the developing 
world and in the South Asian region.2 Siddhisena (2004, p.2) cites that ‘the proportion of the population 
over 60 years has increased from 5.3 in 1953 to 10.8% in 2003 and it will further rise to one quarter 
of Sri Lanka’s population by 2030’.
In demography a society is considered an ageing society when a decreasing birth rate and 
the increase of life expectancy proportionately contribute to the higher number of elderly people 
in that society. Along with this phenomenon there are novel social conditions that are on offer for 
the Sri Lankan social scientists to study. Jary and Jary mention that the older people tend to develop 
‘negative stereotyping and diminished social status’ (2005, p. 9). In general usage the older people 
1  Depat. of Census and Statistics, Sri Lanka. 2004a. ‘Bulletin on Of ﬁ cial Poverty Line for Sri Lanka’, Colombo.
2  Report No. 43396-LK, Sri Lanka Addressing the Needs of an Aging Population, May 28, 2008, Human Development 
Unit, South Asia Region and United Nations, 2001, World Population Prospects-The 2000 Revision, New York, United 
Nations. - retrieved on 15 August 2011 at 9.oo am 
Discussion 
Introduction
106
Conference
is considered a burden and dependents signifying that there are some negative economic, political, 
social and cultural benchmarks. Abercrombie et al (1988) cite that the mainstream sociology has 
neglected the general area of social ageing until the late 1960s. As the ageing population increases 
in modern industrial societies each year there emerged the disciplines such as ‘Sociology of ageing’ 
and ‘Social gerontology’ to study the consequences of the ageing scientiﬁ cally. Social gerontology 
treats ageing in four different dimensions as follows3:
a. a contingent process relating to the social and demographic structure of human groups 
b. as an aspect of personal status in the life cycle
c. as the dynamic component of social stratiﬁ cation in terms of generational membership and
d. as a contemporary social problem raising questions about exploitation, victimization 
and stigmatization. 
In this speci ﬁ c study the second and fourth dimensions are of greater importance. It is 
understood that in sociological analysis the sociologists are not interested in age as a chronological 
category but the social and cultural values and expectations attached to it.  The values changed in 
relation to the social changes have developed certain doubts whether the elders are more prone to 
be away from work, social commitments as in their youth and high degree of sociability. 
The traditional Sri Lankan social structure has been in transition after it was subjected 
to westernization which led to both industrialization and urbanization. As the society has been in 
transition many elements that it comprises began changing. The family structure, gender roles, 
occupational patterns and the role of media were some of the elements that were under the inﬂ uence 
of this initial social change. The nature of the family moving from an ‘extended’ to the ‘nuclear’ 
status was a crucial point. In social research the historical debate discusses that the changing social 
status of the elderly against the processes of modernization and industrialization. The loss of extended 
family established the elderly without the support of a large number of kin who are around them. 
In the study it was found out that most of the households had three generations where 
the children of the older parents live with their children. Many second generation families had either 
one or two children. In only ﬁ ve instances there were three children in the family. There were two 
‘empty-nest’ families in the sample. Even though there are three generations present, the family 
structures convince that the elderly people do not have inmates to foster mutual social relationships 
as in traditional societies. Further it was noted that all urban houses are covered with walls denying 
the freedom of nurturing inter-personal, informal relationships as they wish. It was noted that mostly 
there were formal relationships as some families have got settled in urban areas recently.  
Table 1: Sample of the study
Colombo Kandy
Male 25 24
Female 25 26
Total 50 50
3  (Abercrombie et al, p. 7)
107
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Table 2: Number of elderly parents in a family 
Colombo Kandy
Gender Male Female Male Female
Single parent 10 10 06 08
Both parents 15 15 18 18
Total 25 25 24 26
Most of the urban parents who had been spending their old age after retirement ﬁ nd that 
their children and in-laws are on work and the grandchildren either schooling or perusing tertiary 
education in here or abroad. So till the grandchildren return after school or institution at two thirty 
pm or four or ﬁ ve pm and their own children return after work at four or ﬁ ve pm the parents are 
lonely. So the old age in an urban setting is a life of isolation. Loneliness has become the most 
intimate and the treasured friend of most of the retired elders in urban Sri Lanka. Tabor’s Cyclopedic 
Medical Dictionary (2002, p. 1255) deﬁ nes loneliness as ‘the anxious, depressed or dysphoric mood 
that occurs as a result of physical or psychic isolation’. 
The deterioration of the physical appearance, physical ability and the mental status may 
affect the life of an elderly person to a great extent as he is aged. Different males and females in 
the sample revealed that they had numerous psychological, cultural, social, economic, generational 
and educational disagreements at the domestic sphere that affected their identity. This is not a sudden 
development in their personality and this is the continuation of the phenomenon ‘midlife crisis’. 
Midlife crisis is deﬁ ned as ‘the doubt and anxiety experienced by many people in their ﬁ fth decade’ 
(Jary and Jary, p. 389). As the youth is now a thing of past, the middle aged individual begins to feel 
differently about life. So it makes anyone to look back and re ﬂ ect upon the successes and failures 
of oneself, education, career, social position and future. In this process he or she begins to develop 
a form of uncertainty about the future. Children leaving family to form neo-local residences and 
migration are some other instances that the elderly parents undergo a transition in their personalities. 
A considerable number of parents [20, 20%] in the sample were lonely during the day time, 
and a few others [80, 80%] were fortunate to have the company of the servants. Some have been 
spending the old age in a calm and quiet way enjoying the effects of loneliness [66, 66%] whereas 
a few could not bear the loneliness they were experiencing and incidentally all of them were single 
parents, means either the husband or wife is dead [34, 34%]. Grief generated out of bereavement 
was their main cause. While living in a life of isolation the old parents have a few alternatives to 
resort to. According to their own voices those are ‘to relive in the sacriﬁ ces made for the children in 
the past, helplessness at present and the uncertain future; mainly the life after death’. Many of them 
are anxious of their ‘salvation’ and this feeling itself drives them to seek the solace of a spiritual life. 
Weber explored John Calvin’s (1509-1564) concept ‘Salvation anxiety’ in explaining how 
individuals feel about their fate and it is relevant to the sample studied here. The Buddhists are also 
afraid of what would happen to them after death. The sins committed and the merits accumulated 
during one’s life time decide where the one will be born; heaven or hell, after death. As one gets 
old he or she begins to think of the merits accumulated during the past. Most of the respondents in 
the sample had one common idea that their lives were extremely busy committed to the family and 
108
Conference
the children so other than religious formalities they have not done anything signiﬁ cant. As now they 
are in retirement they have more time to devote for religious activities. Weber believed that religion 
became a driving force or a source of motivation in secularized capitalist societies. In relation to 
the Sri Lankan context a similar atmosphere is seen. In such a context the Buddhist religious programs 
telecast in the Sri Lankan television channels have been a blessing in disguise for the religious quest 
that these individuals need to satisfy.  
Television has become the most prominent cultural artifact of the late 20 th century. It is 
important not only as a form of entertainment but also as an information provider to its viewers. 
It can introduce new value systems, modify the existing attitudes and challenge the belief systems, 
norms and mores of the viewers. Commercialism has changed the outlook and the rationale behind 
the television programs. Because of the success and the power the television began to enjoy, 
the television channels became the medium of transmitting and inculcating religious knowledge. 
Garrod and Lawson (2007) present televangelism, which was extremely popular in America, as 
‘the use of television to reach a mass audience for the preaching of evangelical or fundamental 
Christianity’ (p. 277). 
Television was introduced to Sri Lanka in 1979 and the state-owned Independent Television 
Network (ITN) launched its operations on 13 th April. By now there are twenty three Analog 
Terrestrial Networks, seventeen Local television channels on Satellite or Cable Networks and 
Four Sri Lankan Owned, Pay Television Networks. This fact itself shows that the expansion of 
the electronic communication system in Sri Lanka and Hettige et al (2001) discuss the impact of 
television on Sri Lankan culture, its change and new identity formation. The Buddhist Channel also 
enjoys a prominent place among Buddhists in the country and abroad. The Sri Lankan television 
channels cater to the majority Buddhists as the target viewers. The more the number of viewers it 
has the advertisers are interested in those channels. The researcher compared the total television 
time against ﬁ ve main leading television channels in Sri Lanka against the time devoted for religious 
programs. It was noted that in poya days which the most important religious day is for Buddhists in 
each month the television channels allocate more time and it is a signiﬁ cant increase. 
109
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Table 3: Total Television Time against the Religious Programs 
on Five Different Channels on an Average Day and a Poya Day 
Channel Average or 
Poya Day 
Total television 
time in minutes [a]
Total time on 
religious programs 
in minutes [b]
% of 
[b] 
against 
[a]
SLRC
Average Day
1215
25 2.05
Poya Day 900 74
ITN
Average Day
1180
75 6.35
Poya Day 410 34.7
Swarnavahini Average Day 1080 30 2.77
Poya Day 465 43.0
Sirasa Average Day 1050 30 2.85
Poya Day 60 5.70
TNL Average Day 692 --- ---
Poya Day 405 58.5
The above Table shows the remarkable increase of time allocated for religious programs 
on poya days.4 The speciﬁ c Buddhist religious days like Vesak and Poson, the television channels 
allocate more time telecasting live programs such as delivering sermons by eminent priests, pirith 
chanting, documentaries on sacred places in Sri Lanka and abroad, Jataka story or any other drama 
that has a moral value and Dhamma discourses. Both Sri Lanka Rupavahini Corporation (SLRC) and 
ITN are state owned television channels whereas the other three are private channels. The Directors 
and the program producers of each channel have responded to the majority Sri Lankan Buddhists’ 
religious sensitivity. 
4  Sunday Observer TV Guide, Sunday September 11, 2011, V ol. 94, No. 37,. pp. 119-120.  
110
Conference
Figure 1: Total Television Time against the Religious Programs 
On Five Different Channels on an Average Day and a Poya Day
During the preliminary survey the researcher understood that most of the aged parents who 
live in urban areas have got used to the television for religious activities. It does not mean that they 
never frequent to the temple for religious purposes but the life style at present in the families and 
their personal reasons have made their attendance to the temple limited at times. The reasons given 
by different parents are signiﬁ cant. A mother from Colombo said that:
‘My son works in a private ﬁ rm, so even on Poya days he has to work.  He does not like 
my going to the temple which is two kilometers away since I suffer from arthritis. When he 
comes home it is too late to go to the temple. So I am used to the television to watch a lot 
of things and I learn a lot’. 
A father from Colombo also expressed the same idea. 
‘I am very old now and I have many ailments. So if I go to the temple it is a trouble for 
me and others. So I prefer to stay at home because there are many religious programs on 
different television channels’. 
2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
2.05
6
74
6.35
2
34.7
2.77 2
43
2.855.7
0
58.5
Average Da
Poya Day
ay
111
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Many old parents from Colombo and Kandy said that they are unable to attend the temple 
due to various reasons so they are restricted to residences. The sufferings from many diseases, their 
children being busy and the availability of numerous television programs have made them think 
that they are not going to lose a lot. After the preliminary survey the researcher found out that many 
aged parents are happy with the role played by television on their lives. The researcher was informed 
that most of these aged parents have made it a habit to watch and listen to the religious programs 
telecast or broadcast on television and radio early in each day. So it means that there is a positive 
social aspect of the television. A father from Kandy mentioned that:
‘I studied religion at school from grade three onwards, after O/Ls we did not pay much 
attention to religion even though we attended temple on poya days and participated in 
religious festivals and processions. During A/Ls religion was neglected totally. While 
employed there were very few times we engaged in religious activities and we were thinking 
of building our own house and the education of our children. But now we are old. As we 
get older we feel insecure. When we think of death and life after death we think of being 
religious. Television gives a good opportunity because I always watch Dhamma discourses. 
Many intellectuals representing lay and the clergy take part and we learn the complex 
aspects of religion in a simple way’. 
The above example summarizes the world view of the Buddhists. All Buddhists believe 
that being born a human is a rare opportunity. With the in ﬂ uence of Hinduism they ﬁ rmly believe 
in rebirth also. What one does in this life will decide one’s life in next birth. So they have to 
accumulate merits when they can, to have a better life after death. A mother from Colombo replied that:
‘I believe in rebirth, if I do good only I will have a better life in my next birth. So I want to 
do good to be born in a better place. I always remind myself the good things I have done in 
this life. I think I will be born in a good place’.  
In analyzing the answers received from the respondents the researcher could formulate how 
individuals use, perceive, interpret and respond to the media. The media dependency theory developed 
by Sandra Ball-Rokeach and Melvin DeFleur (1976), the Cultivation theory developed by George 
Gerbner et al (1986) and the Social action theory developed by Anderson and Meyer (1988) have 
certain relevance to the social conditions experienced during the study.  
The social action theory developed by Anderson and Meyer, suggested that media has hidden 
messages that inﬂ uence their audience. Unlike the original research the media content has a positive 
inﬂ uence on the viewer. According to them the meanings arise in relation to the ‘intentions of 
the producer, the conventions of the content and the interpretations of the receiver’ (p. 48). In all 
these religious programs the main aim was to win the people for the channel and they have used 
different methods to attract the audience. Since the individual is unable to visit some important 
places the television crew visits the speciﬁ c place and bring it live to the sitting room of the viewer. 
So the viewer actively participates in the programs that are telecast. John Fiske (1990) was also in 
the opinion that the television viewers involve in creating meaning and interpreting the progra m’s 
text. A comment made by a mother from Colombo was a real testimony to this. 
‘I wanted to visit India before I die. But I don’t have money. My children also cannot spend 
a lot of money on that pilgrimage. The television brought all those places I wanted to visit 
112
Conference
during the last poya day and now I am very happy. I feel like I have been to the place. I saw 
places like Bodhgaya, Kusinara, Lumbini and many other places I have learnt and read. 
If I can watch that program again I am happy’.  
So it was understood that most of the Sri Lankans during their old age wish to go to 
the birthplace of the Lord Buddha and many sacred places associated with the life of Gautama 
Buddha. But due to ﬁ nancial restrictions, they are incapable and they do not want to be a burden 
to their children reminding the media dependency theory. According to the media dependency 
theory developed by Sandra Ball-Rokeach and Melvin DeFleur (1976) audiences depend on media 
information to meet needs and reach goals. In this context the need is the spiritual satisfaction of 
the aged individuals. The goal is to counter loneliness through Dhamma counseling. The elders have 
more knowledge through books and religious newspapers and the content of media messages and 
their effects on audiences are vital. The main idea of the Cultivation theory developed by George 
Gerbner is that the ‘persistent long term exposure to television content has small but measurable 
effects on the perceptual worlds of audience members’. In doing this the social institutions and media 
systems interact with audiences to create needs, interests, and motives in the viewer. The most 
important fact to note was that most of these theories consider the effect of media as negative but 
the researcher identiﬁ ed the opposite.
The researcher got to know that almost all in the sample have similar views in analyzing 
the type of the psychological conditions the aged people undergo. All of them were suffering from 
different psychological conditions but in a wider range. They were suffering from loneliness, 
insecurity, depression, anxiety, stress and social isolation. A considerable number of respondents 
voiced their opinions about the existing conditions. A father from Colombo explained:
‘True we are old and suffer from many diseases. Those are natural. But I think while having 
medicine for the body we need a special therapy for the mind. The best mental therapy comes 
out of religion. The best treatment for the dejected mind is Buddhism’. 
A mother from Kandy replied that:
‘No use of taking medicine. As you become old the sufferings are natural. I know some of 
these things do not have medicine. Best thing is to accumulate merit for the next life’.  
So, many of them were in the opinion that the freely available religious programs in 
the television ﬁ nd them solace in their old age. Thompson (1995) mentions this type of interaction 
as mediated quasi-interaction. The aged people foster a monological relationship with the television. 
Some admitted that they have one-way communication while watching the program and later 
a discussion with oneself over the matters learnt. Normally counseling takes place as one is ‘listening 
to someone and giving them advice about their problems’. In this context it is the aged individual 
listening to the television program and receives the advice given by the venerable Sangha or any 
other lay intellectual. The Dhamma counseling takes place in relation to technology. The electronic 
temple; television, has become the source of religion, guide and advice for the problems created 
by the old age. 
It was noted that irrespective of the level of education and socio-economic background 
all the respondents in the sample were aware of the ideas of Buddhist philosophy. They knew that 
the solution to all these problems is to live an exemplary life, which means, a principled life. 
113
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
The cycle of life – the journey of Samsara, should be stopped. Many of them have become 
vegetarians and are devoted to meritorious acts. They cherish Dhamma as the most important thing 
in their lives. Nearly ﬁ fty percent in the sample had cassettes, DVDs, CDs, books and newspapers 
to watch, listen and refer as they want. Rather than visiting the temple and getting the doubts 
clariﬁ ed by the priest they have used to use the technology available. A very few (5%) have joined 
the internet websites that cater to Buddhist philosophy. A mother from Colombo mentioned that:
‘I need something to engage in when I do not have anything speci ﬁ c to do. That is why 
I ask my children to get me these books. They are highly valuable and I have a very good 
collection of Buddhist resources. I share those with my friends who are also like me. 
We talk about these things. Now we realize that only thing one can take with oneself is 
the good things one does’. 
Many aged individuals in the sample conﬁ rmed that they have nothing to achieve other than 
a peaceful death. Almost all were happy that they had produced worthy children and they perform 
well in the society. They are happy with the grandchildren and ready to leave this world for 
somewhere which is beyond their comprehension. The only hope is the hope for a better life after 
death. The only way to achieve that is to remain the rest of life in a responsible manner. In obtaining 
that they need to utilize everything that they can have and one way is to utilize the religious programs 
to improve their spirituality. The spiritual solace would eventually lead to their destination. A father 
from Kandy stated that:
‘Death is inevitable. We have to face that reality. If we have not done anything wrong 
we should not be afraid. But as lay people we all wish to be born in heaven. That is also 
craving in one way. Yet according to Buddhism it is the thought process at the decisive 
moment takes one to heaven or hell. That also we cannot control. I take it as it is’. 
Conclusion
Old age is a critical phase in anyone’s life. It is assumed that any lay person gets disturbed 
when he thinks of death. Since he cannot avoid he has to face it. Like in many other challenges 
in life the respondents have decided to take this challenge also. In meeting this uncomfortable 
experience they have to have a clear mindset. Loneliness associated with the old age aggravates 
the fear of death and uncertainty of life. The aged individuals convinced the researcher that they 
use religion to condition their minds on brevity of life, impermanence and transience. The most 
powerful medium for this is the religious programs telecast by television. The audio-visual effects 
internalize the religious teachings in their minds in a very powerful manner. At this moment they 
need an amicable counselor who can share their sentiments. Even though the television is inanimate 
the aged individuals consider television as the counselor that can pave way for them to their salvation.    
Conclusion
114
Conference
References  
Abercrombie, Nicholas., Hill, Stephen and Bryan S. Turner (1998) The Penguin Dictionary of 
Sociology, London: Penguin Press 
Abercrombie, Nick (1996) Television and Society, Cambridge: Polity Press
Anderson, J. A. and Meyer, T. P. (1988). Mediated communication: A social interaction perspective. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Ball-Rokeach, S. J., and DeFleur, M. L. (1976) A dependency model or mass-media effects. 
Communication Research, 3, pp. 3-21.
Carey, James W. (1989) Communication as Culture: Essays on Media and Society, London: Unwin 
Hyman 
Donald, Venus (2002) Taber’ s Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary, V ol. 1, 19th Ed., New Delhi: Jaypee 
Brothers. 
Fiske, John (1987) Understanding Popular Culture, London: Unwin Hyman 
Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., and Signorielli, N. (1986). Living with television: the dynamics 
of the cultivation process, in J. Bryant and D. Zillman (Eds.), Perspectives on media effects
(pp. 17–40). Hilldale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Giddens, Anthony (1997) Sociology, Cambridge: Polity Press 
Gosling, R. and Taylor, S. (2011) Principles of Sociology, London: London University Press 
Hettige, S. T., Marcus Mayer, and Ayoma Abeysuriya [Ed.s] (2001) Globalization, Electronic 
Media and Cultural Change, Colombo: German Cultural Institute
Jary, D. and Jary, J. (2005) Collins Internet-linked Dictionary of Sociology, Glasgow: Collins.
Lawson, Tony and Garrod, Joan (2007) Complete A to Z Sociology Handbook , London: Hodder 
and Stoughton 
Lull, James (1995) Media, Communication, Culture, Cambridge: Polity Press
Siddhisena, K. A. P. 2004. Socio-economic implications of aging in Sri Lanka: an overview. Working 
Paper Number WP105. Oxford Institute of Aging Working Papers. http://www.aging.ox.ac.uk
Thompson, John B. (1995) The Media and Modernity, Cambridge: Polity Press
References  
115
The Utility of Buddhist Psychotherapeutic 
Techniques for Liberation
Venerable Kirimetiyawe Dhammasiri Thera 
Buddhasravaka Bhikshu University 
The Buddha and psychotherapy
It is surprising that already in 6th century B.C. a Great Teacher known by the name of Gotama
the Buddha (523-443 B.C) has presented a remarkable system of psychotherapy unique in theory 
and practice. This theory and practice is well preserved in early Buddhism as presented in the Pali 
Tipitaka. The ﬁ rst joy of saying of Buddha in Dhammapada presents an extraordinary stanza to 
convey the psychotherapeutic treatment in Buddhism. 
“Though many a birth I wandered in Samsāra, seeking, but not ﬁ nding, the builder of 
the house. Sorrowful is it to be born again and again. O house-builder! Thou art seen. Thou shall 
build not house again. All thy rafters are broken. Thy ridge-pole is shattered. My mind has attained 
the unconditioned. Achieved is this end of craving.1“
As it is presented by Gay Watson, there is etymological link between therapy and Buddhism. 
Archetypal psychologist James Hillman notes ‘the Greek word therapeia refers also to care, the root 
is dher, which means ‘carry’ support, hold and is related to dharma, the Sanskrit meaning ‘habit and 
custom’ as carrier. The therapist is one who carries and takes care as does a servant (Greek= theraps, 
therapon). A Tibetan Lama also points to Dharma as the carrier of truth, which can be thought of as 
an antidote, a remedy or cure to promote change and transformation. The therapist is one who carries 
and takes care. This observation shows that Buddhism is one of the greatest psychotherapeutic 
enterprises.
The meaning of above stanza could be known as introductory words to psychotherapy 
in Buddhism as well it further “implies that the whole purpose of Buddhism is to apply mental 
therapy…the Buddha who recognized the fatal malady which is affecting all sentient beings, to which 
he gave the name Dukkha or suffering… 2“ According to this teaching human beings are mentally 
sick. Therefore, it should be treated to cure them of their maladies. In contrast to the expedients of 
western psychiatry, Buddhist mental therapy aims at total integration of the personality in a higher 
level. Since craving (Tanhā) is the root cause of suffering and it is necessary to uproot and ﬁ nally 
craving should be extinguished.
Although at ﬁ rst sight Buddhism as a religious tradition founded in the ﬁ fth century BCE 
might seem far removed from the world of psychotherapy in the twenty ﬁ rst century. In fact, I suppose 
that the Buddhist ideas have contributed to the development of Western thinking in the psychological 
ﬁ elds since the times of William James and Carl G. Jung. In recent years, substantial body of theory 
and practice were integrated in a number of different therapeutic integrations. The teaching of Buddha 
1  The Dhammapada Edited By K. Sri Dhammananda, Jar ā Vagga, 8 and 9 stanzas, page 326 
2  Silver Jubilee Commemoration V olume of the University of Kelaniya, A Note on Psycho-therapy in Early Buddhism, 
Bandaranayake Abhayaratne, Editor in Chief, Weerasinghe, S.G.M, page 335  
The Buddha and psychotherapy
116
Conference
concerns about the human condition and response to the suffering. It is stated that early Buddhism 
introduces a point of reference, which western psychotherapy has been unable to ﬁ t into its theories, 
for an example ﬁ eld of moral values while engaging in treating with psychotherapy.
Let us now observe few Suttas of psychotherapeutic practices as depicted in the Tipitaka. 
Some of them are, The Avijjā Sutta, The Tayodhamma Sutta, The Dutiya Yodhajãv ūpama Sutta, 
the Vitakka Sath āna Sutta, the Alagadd ūpama Sutta, the C ūlahatthipadopama Sutta, the Maha 
Hatthipadopama Sutta are some of them. Apart from these Suttas each and every discourses of 
Buddha mainly relates to our discussion.
Role of Buddha as Psychotherapist 
The quali ﬁ cation which needs to be a good psychotherapist is available in Buddhism. 
The writer of encyclopedia of religion and ethics; Mercial Elida says that “he (Buddha) experimented 
with the practices of renunciants- begging, wandering, celibacy, techniques of self-restraint and 
the like and he organized a community in which discipline played a central role. Judging from 
the movement he inspired, He was not only an innovator but also a charismatic personality. Through 
the course of his ministry he gathered around him a group of wandering mendicants and nuns, 
as well as men and women who continued to live the life of householders… 3“ 
I suppose this interpretation clearly shows the qualiﬁ cation of Buddha as a psychotherapist. 
He has named different epithets; Sabbaññu (the Omniscient), Akutobhaya (the Fearless), Anūpama
(the Incomparable) by himself or other peoples according to his charismatic personality. These 
epithets were coined in Buddha’s teaching and also frequent occurrence, e.g. Dharm ākara
(the Mine of the Dhamma) and Advayavādin (the Teacher of non-duality), Tathāgata (one who attained 
to the Truth), Arahant (worthy of offering or destroyer of enemies), Sammāsambuddha (perfectly 
awakened), Vijjācaranasaṃpannō (full of knowledge and practice), Sugata (well-gone), Lokavidū
(who knows the world), Purisadammasarathã (trainer of amenable men), Lokajeññha (superior in 
the world) etc… These appellations have deep meaning, probably can understand the Buddha as 
is best therapist. According to the Lakkhaṇa Sutta of Digha Nikāya proves the great personality of 
Buddha. The Suttas explains thirty-two marks; “he has feet with level treat, on the soles of his feet 
are wheels with a thousand spokes, complete with felloe and hub, he has soft and tender hands, he 
is proportioned like a banyan-tree; the height of his body is the same as the span of his outstretched 
arms, and conversely...4“ The Buddha did his works as the spiritual therapist who is embodied with 
highly venerated ethical behavior and four types of sublime qualities; mettā (loving-kindness) karunā
(boundless compassion) muditā (asymptotic-joy) and upekhā (equanimity). Anyone who trained as 
a counselor has to develop spiritual qualities towards his clients.
American psychologist, Carl Rogers observes that ‘empathy  ’ is best quality and it has to keep 
in mind in the process of counseling for clients. The Buddha instructed his disciples to convey his 
doctrine with the empathetic-feeling towards the listener. This is possible to ﬁ nd every sermons of 
Buddha. As it is said by John Welwood “Carl Rogers’s term ‘unconditional positive regard’ although 
it sounded appealing as an ideal therapeutic stance, it is hard to put into practice… the Buddhist 
counterpart of unconditional positive regard is loving-kindness. Loving kindness is unconditional 
3  Mercia Elida, Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, page 321 
4  D īgha Nikaya Translation, Maurice Walshe, page 441-442
Role of Buddha as Psychotherapist 
117
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
friendliness a quality of allowing and welcoming human beings and their experience...” 5
The Buddha did his work throughout his life as psychotherapist for the wellbeing of people. It was 
his instruction for his disciples.  
Four noble truths as psychotherapy
Buddhism was formulated in India at 6century BC; many aspects of the doctrine have been 
misinterpreted and misunderstood throughout the centuries. However, most of the scholars have been 
interpreted Buddhism, according to their views and fancies without ignoring ‘what Buddhism really 
is, and what did the Buddha preach? And what is the purpose of Buddhism? Moreover to that, some 
savants those who nourished under the inﬂ uence of philosophy and science have made an effort to 
put Buddhism under the category of scientology. Therefore, I presume that they have not clearly 
understood the function of Buddhism and the core of Buddhism. When we read the teachings of 
Buddha can understand that there is nothing other than psychotherapy in Buddhism.
 When we read the history of pre-Buddhist thinkers is possible to realize that they have 
interpreted many theories regarding epistemology, metaphysics and ethics but the core of those 
teachings do not conducive to the asseveration of truth. As it was observed by D.J. Kalupahana
“the Buddha’s terminology relating to freedom, namely, nibbāna or nirvna, as well as what is 
achieved as a result of the attainment for such freedom, namely, the elimination of suffering, referred 
to by the term dukkha (duḥkha), and the experience of happiness or sukha. These three terms are 
conspicuously absent in the available pre-Buddhist literature… 6“ I think these three are compulsory 
factors in psychotherapy.  
The whole teaching of Buddha relates to experience happiness that was not sullied by 
impurities. Therefore, the ﬁ rst sermon of the Buddha, setting the motion of Dhamma wheel 
(Dhammachakkappavattana Sutta) illustrates that one has to abandon two extremes; self mortiﬁ cation 
and self indulgence in order to realize the Nibbāna. The Buddha said that these two extremes are 
the taproot causes which led people to experience endless suffering. The Buddha says that he 
(the Tathāgata), realizing the error of both these two extremes, followed a middle path. This new 
path was discovered by him and it was named in his word ‘majjhimā patipada’ the middle path. 
This path produces spiritual insight and intellectual wisdom to see things as they truly are. When 
the insight is cleared and the intellect is subtle everything is seen in its true way. The four noble 
truths in a sense are a summary of the Buddha’s teachings from the point of the view of practicing 
Buddhist psychotherapy. The core teaching of Buddhism, which derive from the Buddha’s profound 
insight, are primarily thought about the relationship between existential afﬂ ictions such as sickness, 
old age and death, and the creation of self. 
According to materialistic point of view the self is most important in order to achieve 
self-centered goals in life but from the Buddhist point of view self is more harm in its spiritual 
avenue. So, here in the four noble truths which are the truth of suffering, the truth of the end of 
suffering and the truth that leads to the end of suffering; this teaching contains psychotherapeutic 
discussion. “From a different school of psychotherapy, Padmal de Silva has written widely comparing 
the behavior modiﬁ cation methods of early Buddhism to those of contemporary behavioral psycho-
5  John, Welwood, Toward a psychology of Awakening, page 165
6  Kalupahana, David, J. The Buddha and the Concept of Freedom, Buddhist cultural centre, Sri Lanka, 2008, page 1
Four noble truths as psychotherapy
118
Conference
therapy, arguing that Buddhist teachings contain many useful strategies for behavioral and cognitive 
modiﬁ cation and show that the Buddha was concerned with his follower’s dally lives as well as 
their ultimate liberation.
Buddhism itself could also be possible to term as psychology which based as it is upon 
exploration of existing mind states, starting from contemplation of their unsatisfactoriness in 
order to facilitate an ever-increasing understanding of what may be more healthy…even within 
a psychotherapy con ﬁ ned to personal history, an awareness of interdependence and the ultimate 
emptiness of separated and permanent essence may be helpful and liberating… 7“It shows that 
the teaching of Buddha parallel to modern western therapy. The teaching of four noble truths 
illustrates that each and everyone has to face the challenge of life. Birth and death are sound causes 
of life, therefore person dare to face the reality of life. And Buddhist psychotherapy parallels to 
cognitive behavioral models.
The function of Buddhist psychotherapy relates to the doctrine of the non-existence of 
the ‘self’. It is important to understand the illusion of a permanent ‘self’ is the primary factor which 
keeps individual in the cycle of suffering. Craving for sensory grati ﬁ cation (kāmatanhā), craving 
for continued existence ( bhavatanhā), and craving for annihilation ( vibhavatanhā). These are 
the motivational forces for the unenlightened individual’s behavior. All these three aspects, under 
the teaching of Buddhist psychology, are noted as perception which subject to distortion, by one’s 
desires, by one’s craving, by the illusion of ego. Buddhist psychology, suggests several interrelated 
concepts that explain human behavior:
1. The motivation for behavior is craving, which ultimately leads to suffering.
2. Perception and cognition are distorted, clouding one’s experience of reality. 
3. The sense of self is an illusion to which human beings desperately cling, allowing for the experience 
of desire and craving.
4. Consciousness is composed of false notions and concepts, physical and mental phenomena are 
seen by the unenlightened individual as existing intrinsically.
The Buddha points out the way man manipulates his patterns of behavior while responding 
to the outer world in Madupindika sutta of Majjima Nikaya as follows. “Dependent on the eye and 
form, eye consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition there 
is feeling. What one feels, that one perceives, what one perceives, what one perceives, that one 
thinks about. What one thinks about, that one mentally proliferates, with what one has mentally 
proliferated as the source, perceptions and notions mental proliferation beset a man with respect to 
past, future, and present forms cognizable through the eye… 8“ 
The process of identi ﬁ cation takes the following form: This is mine ( etaṃ mama), this 
I am (esō hamasmi), and this is my self (esō me attā). Of these, the ﬁ rst is due to craving (tanhā), 
the second to conceit ( māna), and the third to wrong view ( diññhi). What is called self-conceit 
arises at a pre-rational level, whereas the idea of self, although conditioned by craving, arises at 
an elementary re ﬂ ective level. It is also called ( sakkāya-diññhi), the personality- view. It af ﬁ rms 
7  Watson, Gay, The Resonance of Emptiness, A Buddhist Inspiration for a Contemporary Psychotherapy, Motilal 
Babarsidass, Delhi, 2001, page 173 
8 8 The Middle Length Discourse of the Buddha, Translation of Majjima Nik āya, Bhikkhu Ñ ānamoli and Bhikkhu 
Bodhi, Madupiṇóika Sutta, page 203.
119
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
the presence of an abiding self in the psycho-physical organism in one of twenty ways. If consciousness 
(viññāna), for instance, is to be assumes as self, such an assumption could manifest itself in four 
ways: as it was said by Prof. Y. Karunadasa.
1. “consciousness is the same as self ( vinnanam attato samanupassati ), as in the case of 
a ﬂ ame of a lamp which is identical with its visual appearance,
2. the self possesses consciousness, just as a tree has a shadow,
3. consciousness is within the self, just as the scent is in the ﬂ ower, and
4. The self is in consciousness, just as a gem in a casket. This description is extended to 
the other four aggregates as well. Thus, there are in all twenty possible relations between 
the ﬁ ve aggregates and the hypothetical self. This is how Buddhism explains the origin 
of the erroneous belief in a self-entity.9“
Buddhism understands that this kind of distorted thought which based on the illusory 
creation in the mind. When the person attaches to the notion of self, then it starts to activate 
the function of mind and body. According to Buddhism mind is very important factor because it 
teaches in Dhammpada “mind is the forerunner of (all evil) states. Mind is chief; mind-made are 
they…And mind is the forerunner of (all good) states…” 10, further Buddhism understands that mind 
is very radiant at the birth stage but by the passing of time mind becomes to change and it is sullied 
by numerous deﬁ lements. 
The Madupiṇdika Sutta of Majjhima –Nik āya states that how does man construct mental 
proliferation with inner world and outer world. The analysis goes much deeper to trace its psychological 
origins. The analysis offered in the Sutta begins with the sensory process and identi ﬁ es Papāñca
the most noteworthy cause of inner conﬂ ict. “Depending on the eye and material objects arises visual 
consciousness. The coming together of these three is sense contact. Depending on sense contact 
arises sensation. What one senses one recognizes (or conceptualizes). What one recognizes one 
think about. One gets obsessed with (papañceti) what one think about. As a result of this, thoughts 
of conceptual obsession (papañca saññāsaṅkhā) assail the person with respect to material objects 
cognizable by the eye, belonging to the past, present and future… 11“  The same process is repeated 
with reference to all senses. “ 
As long as the sensory process leads to psychological consequences outlined in the above 
passage certain latent tendencies of the mind remain deeply entrenched. They are the latent 
tendency to lust or attachment (rāgānusaya), hatred (pañighānusaya), dogmatic views (diññhānusaya), 
doubt… 12“When these emotions come to contact with the mentality of person, then person creates 
psychological hindrance in his mind. And Buddhism enumerates many types of such psychological 
hindrances.
For an example Sallekha Sutta of Majjhima –Nikāya enumerates forty-four types of cankers.  
The Vatthūpama Sutta of same Nikāya points out the nature of mind by Buddha “Bhikkhus, suppose 
9  Patisambhidamagga, PTS. V ol. 1. Page 144-145
10  The Dhammapada Edited By K. Sri Dhammananda, Yamaka Vagga, 1 and 2 stanzas, page 41-42
11  Majjhima Nik āya, Translated by I.B. Horner, Middle Length Saying, V ol-I, London, PTS, 1954, page 114 
12  Buddhist Studies in Buddhist Philosophy and Religion, Editors; Pemaratana Soorakkulame and Padmasiri Raluwe, 
Collected Papers of P.D. Premasiri, Peace Within and Without: A Buddhist View; Department of Pali and Buddhist Studies, 
University of Peradeniya, 2006, page 289 
120
Conference
a cloth were deﬁ led and stained, and a dyer dipped it in some dye or other, whether blue or yellow or 
red or carmine; it would look poorly dyed and impure in color. Why is that? because of the impurity 
of the cloth. So too, when the mind is de ﬁ led, an unhappy destination may be expected… 13“This 
analysis indicates that mind is similar to piece of cloth that shines brightly. The mind is also similar 
to that piece of cloth at ﬁ rst of its birth. But when time passes, such bright mind turns to de ﬁ le. 
Therefore, it is necessary to ﬁ nd out proper methods in order to keep mind brightly.   
Techniques of Psychotherapy and liberation
Here, the Buddha enumerates forty-four of illness (in Sallekha Sutta) that afﬂ ict the human 
mind, the following are those; cruel ( vihiṃsā), killing ( pāṇātipātā), take what is not given 
(adinnādānā), uncelibate (abrahmacārã), falsehood (musāvāda), malicious speech ( pisuṇāvācā), 
harsh speech (pharusāvācā), gossip (samphappalāpā), covetous (abhijjhālu), ill-will (byāpannacittā), 
wrong view (micchādiññhã), wrong intention (micchāsaïkappa), wrong speech (micchāvāca), wrong 
action (micchākammanta) etc. having taken into account these deﬁ lements, the Buddha pointed out 
the practical seven methods which support to keep mind straightly in Sutta literature. For examples; 
Subbāsava Sutta contains following techniques; 
1. Eliminating de ﬁ lement is by developing proper seeing (Dassanā). It can further elaborates 
that According to Buddhist psychotherapy all passion are possible to divide into two 
categories from the point of view of their eradication, namely, the intellectual passions 
and the emotional passions. The former is due to errors of judgment or want of 
discrimination; the latter is produced by the habits, the emotional nature of beings. 
The Nettippakaraṇa gives a process of the arising of passions which is different only 
its approach. It traces their origin in perversions ( vipallāsa) on account of which man 
clings (upādāna) to sensuality (kāma) to continued existence (bhava), to views (diññhi) 
and to belief in a soul (attavada)...  The intellectual passions are removable through 
realization of the truth (darśanāprahātavya) 
2. Eliminating de ﬁ lement is by having restraining (saṃvarā) 
3. Eliminating de ﬁ lement is by means of attending wisely to one’s needs (pañisevana)
4. Eliminating de ﬁ lement is by means of endurance (adhivāsanā)
5. Eliminating de ﬁ lement is by releasing them or dropping them (parivajjanā)
6. Eliminating de ﬁ lement is by avoidance (vinodanā) 
7. Eliminating de ﬁ lement is by self-development or cultivation (bhāvanā)
When unenlightened man touched by those de ﬁ lements, he would be really experience 
metal and bodily sickness. If a person makes hard effort to keep the balance of mind accordingly 
to these seven or any of these methods. He will experience spiritual happiness due to keeping mind 
strongly. For an example, “it is stated that the venerable Ananda, once visited a householder named 
Sirivaddha who was ill. On hearing from the patient that he was in much pain, and that his pains 
were getting worse, Ananda advised him to engage in the meditation of mindfulness. Similarly, it 
13  The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha, A Translation of the Majjhima Nik āya, Translated By Bhikkhu 
¥āṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi, Vatthūpama Sutta, page 118
Techniques of Psychotherapy and liberation
121
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
is recorded that the Buddha himself visited two ailing monks, Mogallana and Kassapa, who were 
in pain, and advised each of them to engage in mindfulness meditation. The very important issue 
is further available in the story of venerable Anurudha.’ He was sick, and was grievously afﬂ icted. 
Many monks who visited him, ﬁ nding him calm and relaxed, asked him how his ‘painful sensations’ 
evidently made no impact on his mind. He replied; ‘it is because I have my mind well-grounded in 
mindfulness.”14   
These three stories clearly show that meditation can reduce, or ‘block out’ the mental 
aspect of, the pain – for example, while the physical sensations may remain intact, one’s 
vulnerability to subjectively felt pain is reduced. The different passage of Samyutta Nikāya explains 
that  unenlightened man, when touched by bodily feelings, grieves and laments…and is distraught…
but the enlightened disciple who well-trained, when touched by painful bodily feelings, will not weep, 
will not worry. Here, the unenlightened man just experienced two kind of feelings; a bodily and 
a mentally. The above mention techniques could be used from the surface level to reduce metal and 
physical afﬂ ictions. But when those techniques cultivate in a deepest level can be used as (therapy) 
or therapeutic way even to put into end multifarious deﬁ lements. It is also possible to understand that 
these techniques could also be further used as behavioral modiﬁ cation strategiesAs it was illustrated 
by Padmal de Silva “These strategies are remarkably similar to several of the established techniques 
of modern behavioral therapy. Thus, if Buddhist psychology is akin to modern humanistic, 
transpersonal and existential psychologies in view of its emphasis on the individual…develop-
ment thought personal effort. It also has… behavioral techniques… 15“The other noteworthy point 
is that among the techniques in Sabbasava Sutta; Eliminating deﬁ lement is by self-development or 
cultivation (bhāvanā) is very important because mediation is very compulsory factor in Buddhism. 
Buddhism has two separate meditations, samatha and vipassanā. The word samatha means ‘tranquility’ 
and vipassanā; means insight. Both these fraternities are bundled each other. The meditation is very 
key factor in the practice of psychotherapy in Buddhism. On the other hand, the above techniques 
are served their function as meditative instructor. And those methods could be used as meditative 
techniques to overcome suffering in life. Somewhere of Buddhist literature explains many mundane 
beneﬁ ts, when someone cultivates mindfulness day and night, it is said by the Buddha such person 
would not cause by accidental calamities in life.  
The Vitakkasanthāna Sutta of Majjhima –Nikāya highlights other ﬁ ve techniques in order 
to keep the mind straightly. In this discourse the emphasis is on ways of dealing with thoughts 
that feed the unwholesome emotions. Like the Sabbāsava Sutta, this discourse is most important 
for man who wishes to gain mastery over mechanical ﬂ ow of thoughts that feed the unwholesome 
emotions. Such thoughts are associated with passion, (chandūpasaṃhitā), associated with hatred 
(dosūpasaṃhitā) and associated with delusion or confusion of mind (mahūpasaṃhitā). Unwholesome 
emotional thoughts produce suffering not only the person who has them, but also others with who 
that person associates. Therefore, we need practical method to master certain techniques to prevent 
the ﬂ ow of unwholesome thought. These techniques are functioned as methods of giving treatment or 
therapeutic way for the reduction of passion as well the ultimate level those techniques can be used 
to an extinguish each and every unwholesome emotions in our mind. The strategies as presented in 
Sutta can be seen in a hierarchical order, each to be tried if the preceding one fails. 
14  Kwee, M.G.T, & Holdstock, T.L, Western & Buddhist Psychology Clinical Perspective, Buddhist Psychology; 
Theory and therapy, De Silva Padmal, Eburon Publishers, University, Amsterdam, 1999, page 137 
15  Ibid, Page 138
122
Conference
1. Switch to an opposite or incompatible thought (bhikkhunā tamhā nimittā aññaṁ nimittaṁ 
manasikātabbaṁ kusal ūpasaṁhitaṁ). The ﬁ rst is to re ﬂ ect on an object which is 
associated with thoughts which unwanted cognition is associated with passion or lust, 
one should think of something promoting lustlessness; if it is associated with malice, 
one should think of something promoting loving kindness. It is opposite to unwholesome 
thoughts.
2. Ponder on harmful consequence. (bhikkunā tesaṁ vitakkānaṁ ādãnavo upaparikkhitabbo)
if, however, the unwanted thought still keeps arising, one is advised to ponder on the perils 
and disadvantage of the thought; that is to consider its harmful consequences. This 
would help someone to escape from unwholesome thoughts. 
3. Ignore and distract; (bhikkun ā tesa ṁ vitakk ānaṁ asati-amanasik āro āpajjitabbo) 
if the earlier is failed, this is recommended by the Buddha. The technique of ignoring 
an unwanted thought is recommended. One is to strive not to pay attention.
4. Re ﬂ ect on removal of causes; (bhikkunā tesaṁ vitakkānaṁ vitakkasaṅkhārasanthānaṁ 
manasikātabbaṁ) if the problem still exists, then a further strategy is recommended. 
This is to reﬂ ect on the removal or stopping of the causes of the target thought.
5. Control with forceful effort; (bhikkunā tesaṁ vitakkānaṁ…tena bhikkhave bhikkun ā 
dantehi danta ūmādhāya jivh āya t āluṁ āhacca cetas ā citta ṁ abhinigga ṇhitabbaṁ 
abhinippãḷetabbaṁ abhi santāpetabbaṁ...) if the foregoing strategies fails, then a ﬁ fth 
method is advocated, which is forcefully to restrain and dominate the mind.
The Buddha recommended those techniques to restrain the mind from unwholesome 
emotions. These techniques may also be possible to use as strategies for the use of behavioral 
modiﬁ cation. If an unwholesome thought arises, one is advised to face it directly and continuously. 
I suppose that these strategies are very much helpful to build personality skills in mundane life. On 
the other hand, those techniques make their role under the condition of psychotherapy. Buddhism 
understands each every one of us has ﬁ rm ability for the development of personality. It is reﬂ ected 
clearly in the Buddha’s teaching “self-reliance, extolling what he called attakāra (personal effort), 
purisak āra (human endeavor), purisath āma (human strength), purisaviriya  (human energy), 
purisaparakkama (human value), and purisadhorayha (human responsibility). These may, for instance, 
be noted from the Sampsādanãya Sutta of the Dīgha –Nikāya. These types of personal energies 
should be improved upon ( bhāvetabbaṃ) in one’s progress towards perfection or Nirvāṇa…” 16 
In this respect Buddhist psychotherapy is comparable to the humanistic psychotherapy because 
Buddhism admits the importance of human potential for spiritual growth and self-realization. 
“The life and experience of human beings are not determined by factors totally beyond their control. 
With right effort it is possible to transform the nature of one’s inner life...”17  Therefore, Buddhism 
uses many strategies in order to change unwholesome behavior of man and the ultimate goal of 
those strategies conducive to the enhancement of spiritual life. 
16  Hunan Rights and Religions in Sri Lanka, A Commentary on the universal Declaration of Human Rights, Sri Lanka 
Foundation, 1988, page 3  
17  Symposium on Buddhist Studies, Editor, Rahula Kotapitiye, Premasiri P.D, Early Buddhist and the psychology of 
Emotion,  Twentieth Anniversary Commemoration V olume, Thames Buddhist Vihara, 2003, page 71
123
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Conclusion
It is evident that Buddhism has focused greater attention on the elimination of emotions that 
are harmful to human existence. Therefore, Buddhism recommends a series of technique to remove 
harmful emotions that cause damage in one’s life. Thus, these techniques are applicable irrespective 
of whether or not one has committed oneself to a life devoted to the aim of personal development. 
This personal development comes through the application of Buddha’s doctrine. Such doctrine could 
be known as greatest psychotherapy because it promotes man to train calmness and tranquility. 
The attainment of Arahantship is totally depended on psychological the transformation of personality. 
This transformation comes through the experience of therapeutic prospective. Therefore, it is 
doubtless to say that liberation comes through psychotherapeutic avenue.
Conclusion
124
A Psychological Analysis of Physical and 
Mental Pain in Buddhism
Ashin Sumanacara1
Mahidol University, Thailand.
Pain is a natural part of life and all of us. Ordinary people are in ﬂ icted with physical or 
mental pain. In this paper, ﬁ rstly we will analyse the concept of physical and mental pain according 
to the Pali Nik āyas. Next we will discuss the causes of physical and mental pain, and investigate 
the unwholesome roots: greed (lobha), hatred (dosa) and delusion (moha), and their negative roles in 
causing physical and mental pain. Then we will highlight the Buddhist path to overcoming physical 
and mental pain. Finally we will discuss mindfulness and the therapeutic relationship. Mindfulness, 
as it is understood and applied in Buddhism, is a richer theory than thus far understood and applied 
in Western psychotherapy. Within Buddhism the development of mindfulness must be understood 
to be interrelated with the maturity of morality (sīla), concentration (samādhi) and wisdom (paññā).
A Word about Buddhism
Buddhism, a spiritual movement, arose from the prevalent intellectual, political and cultural 
milieu of Indian society in the 6 th century BCE and has been an in ﬂ uential cultural force in Asia 
for more than 2550 years. In recent decades, it has gained acceptance in the West, largely due to its 
solution of mental pain of human beings through mindfulness meditation.
The core teachings of the Buddha are contained in the Four Noble Truths, which are as 
follows: (1) Dukkha: life is characterized by pain; (2) Samudaya: the cause of pain which is craving 
(taṇhā); (3) Nirodha: pain can be ended by the cessation of craving; and (4) Magga: there is a way 
to achieve the cessation of pain, which is the Noble Eightfold Path (ariya-aṭṭhangika-magga). These 
Four Noble Truths corresponds to four aspects in the practice of medicine: (1) Diagnosis: determining 
if there is a disease. If there is no disease, then there is no need for treatment, but in this case, there 
is a disease, called pain. (2) Aetiology: the cause of the disease corresponds to the Second Noble 
Truth. (3) Prognosis: a judgement about how the disease is likely to progress and that it can be 
cured. Again, if there is no cure, there is no need for treatment. (4) Treatment: pain can be treated 
and cured by the prescription of the Fourth Noble Truth (i.e., the Noble Eightfold Path). The Four 
Noble Truths offer a theoretical method with practical implications for engaging with physical and 
mental pain and reorienting one’s life in order to achieve freedom from them.
In Buddhist psychology, mind has an important place. Buddhist psychology is regarded as 
a science of mind as it deals with mind – “All phenomena are preceded by the mind, mind is their 
chief, they are produced by mind ( manopubbaṅgamā dhammā manoseṭṭhā manomayā)” (Dhp 1). 
With regard to mind, the commentary states: “All classes of arts in the world, speci ﬁ c or generic, 
are achieved by the mind. And, owing to its capacity to produce a variety and diversity of effects 
1  Ashin Sumanacara is a doctoral student (in Buddhist Studies) of Mahidol University, Thailand. Additionally, he 
lectures at Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University, Thailand. 
A Word about Buddhism
125
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
in action, the mind, which achieves all these arts, is itself artistic like the arts themselves” (Maung Tin, 
Trans. 1976, 86). Buddhist psychology classi ﬁ es mind as being either wholesome ( kusala) or 
unwholesome (akusala), and tries to analyse the contents of mind from an ethical perspective. Hence, 
Nyanaponika Thera (1965) considers Buddhist psychology is primarily a practical way to know 
the mind, shape the mind, and free the mind.
Buddhist psychology analyses the person into ﬁ ve constituent aggregates ( khandhas): 
matter or physical body (rūpa), feeling (vedanā), perception (saññā), volitional activities (saṅkhāras) 
and consciousness ( viññāṇa). The ﬁ rst aggregate represents the material component of a person 
(rūpa) and remaining four represent mental components of a person or what we call mind (nāma). 
Another key concept in Buddhist psychology is “dependent co-origination” (paticcasammuppāda), 
the concept of causality. It is regarded as one of the tools to analyse physical and mental pain. 
Consequently, Buddhist psychology explains that dukkha arises depending on the cause and condition.
Buddhist psychology states that because of evil conditions of mind, one commits evil 
deed and deﬁ les one’s mind; and as a result, one becomes victim of his own deeds and loss health. 
Therefore, Buddhism emphasizes the importance of developing one’s own mind. In Buddhism, mental 
development is of greatest importance because without it, it is impossible to gain complete health.
Mindfulness is the essence of Buddhist psychology. Nyanaponika Thera calls this meditation as 
‘the heart of Buddhist meditation’ or even ‘the heart of the entire doctrine’ (dhamma-hadaya) (1992, 7). 
Mindfulness is the core practice of Buddhist psychology, and the body of Buddhist psychology, 
including the Buddha’s original teachings and later writing of the Abhidharma, may be considered 
the theoretical basis for mindfulness (Nyanaponika Thera 1998). Due to the importance of mindfulness 
for healing physical and mental pain, this meditation has been successfully implemented in the area 
of all Buddhist schools of psychotherapy as well as western psychotherapy.
The Analysis of Physical and Mental Pain
We generally translate the Pali term ‘ dukkha’ as ‘pain’ or ‘suffering’, even though it has 
a wider philosophical meaning including un-satisfactoriness, unhappiness, distress, discomfort, 
dissatisfaction, sorrow, af ﬂ iction, anxiety, anguish, and so on. Accordingly, dukkha can refer to 
various unpleasant experiences in varying degrees. Many Buddhist scholars have offered 
explanations on dukkha. For example, Gombrich (1995, 62) says, “The word we translate ‘suffering’, 
lacks a close English equivalent. The meaning of the First Noble Truth is that life is unsatisfactory”. 
On the other hand, Harvey notes: 
The word dukkha refers to all those things which are unpleasant, imperfect, and which we 
would like to be otherwise, “Rich in meaning and nuance … Literally ‘pain’ or ‘anguish,’ 
in its religious and philosophical contexts, dukkha is, however, suggestive of an underlying 
‘unsatifactoriness’ or ‘unease’ that must ultimately mar even our experience of happiness 
(Harvey 2009, 320).
Nevertheless, the common interpretation of the word dukkha to mean suffering, pain, or 
unsatisfactorieness does not convey its true meaning.
The Analysis of Physical and Mental Pain
126
Conference
Now we will try to understand the true meaning of dukkha from the perspective of Four 
Noble Truths. In the ﬁ rst discourse of the Buddha mentions different forms of dukkha. The ﬁ rst sort 
of ‘dukkha’ conveys the meaning of birth (jāti), decay (jarā), disease (byādhi), and death (maraṇa). 
The next sort of ‘dukkha’ conveys the meaning of sorrow (soka), lamentation (parideva), physical-and-
mental pain (dukkha-domanassa), and despair (upāyāsā) – which extends the ﬁ rst sorts of ‘dukkha’. 
The next sort, that ‘ dukkha’ is association with the disliked ( appiyehi sampayogo ), separation 
from the beloved ( piyehi vippayogo), and not getting what one desire is dukkha (yampicchaṁ na 
labhati tampi dukkhaṁ). The last row summarizes what dukkha is by referring to a group called 
“ﬁ ve aggregates of grasping” (pañcupādānakkhandhā): grasping or clinging to the ﬁ ve aggregates 
of (psycho-physical) existence is the whole mass of dukkha.2 Therefore, physical and mental pain 
are generally covered by the Pali terms dukkha and domanassa. Among the different forms of pain, 
physical pain can be birth, aging, pain, disease and death. Mental pain can be grief, lamentation, 
distress. Also, people feel mental pain when they associate with an object or person they dislike or 
are separated from an object or person they like.
The Pali Nikāyas differentiate between dukkha born of physical contact  and domanassa
born of mental contact . For example, the Saccavibhaṅgasutta of the Majjhima Nik āya answers 
the question ‘what are dukkha and domanassa?’ with the following basic formula: 
And what, friends, is dukkha?3 Physical pain, physical discomfort, painful, uncomfortable 
feeling born of physical contact – this is called dukkha” (M III.251). 4 How is  dukkha  
different from domanassa ? Next, the Buddha describes domanassa , ‘mental pain’ in 
the following words: “And what, friends, is domanassa?5 Mental pain, mental discomfort, 
painful, uncomfortable feeling born of mental contact – this is called domanassa (M III, 251).6 
Thus, in the case of the binomial words dukkha-domanassa, the term dukkha (‘du’ = bad 
or painful + ‘kha’ = empty, space) has to be understood as physical pain and the term domanassa 
(‘du’ = bad or painful + ‘manas’ = mind) has to be understood as mental pain (cetasikaṃ dukkhaṃ 
domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti) (cf. Nyanatiloka 1970, 189; Bodhi Ed. 1993, 36, 115-116). Contrary to 
the term dukkha which denotes physical pain (kāyika dukkha) when deﬁ ned as an indriya, domanassa, 
as seen above, refers to mental pain (cetasika dukkha) (See Bodhi Ed. 1993, 36). Thus, Buddhism 
distinguishes two forms of dukkha: physical (kāyika dukkha) and mental (cetasika dukkha). In other 
words, the Pali terms dukkha and domanassa signify the painful feeling of body ( kāyika dukkha 
vedanā) and painful feeling of mind (cetasika dukkha vedanā).
2  The detailed descriptions of every sort of dukkha are found in both the Saccavibhaṅgasutta (M III.248-252) and 
the Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta (D II.290-315).
3  Dukkha, here used in a restricted sense, i.e. dukkha-dukkha (intrinsic pain), the ﬁ rst of the three types of dukkha; 
the other two kinds of dukkha are: vipariṇāma-dukkha (pain due to change), and saṅkhāra-dukkha (pain due to formations) 
or inherent pain (cf. D III.216-222; S IV .259).
4  Katamañca, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ? Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, kāyikaṃ dukkhaṃ kāyikaṃ asātaṃ kāyasamphassajaṃdukkhaṃ 
asātaṃ vedayitaṃ, idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, dukkhaṃ (M III.251). 
5  Domanassa, here used in a more restricted sense, i.e., pain due to change  (vipariṇāma-dukkha), the second type of 
dukkha.
6  Katamañca, bhikkhave, domanassaṁ? Yaṃ kho, bhikkhave, cetasikaṃ dukkhaṃ cetasikaṃ asātaṃ manosamphassajaṃ 
dukkhaṃ asātaṃ vedayitaṃ, idaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, domanassaṃ (M III.251).
127
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Now we will discuss the Pali term domanassa from the Abhidhamma point of view. 
Abhidhammatthasa ṅgaha states that “ domanassa  is associated with aversion ( paṭigha) and 
accompanied by unhappiness, and therefore unwholesome ( akusala)” (Abhidh-s 1). The term 
domanassa is explained in the Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā:
‘Unhappy mind’ (dummano) means an irritated mind or someone who has that; that is, 
the consciousness [itself] or the person with that consciousness. The state of that [consciousness 
or person] is unhappiness ( domanassa ). It is a term for unpleasant mental feeling. 
Accompanied by this is being accompanied by unhappiness. Striking against the object 
is aversion or hate; because of its violent nature it occurs as if striking against an object 
(Abhidh-s-ṭ 61; Wijeratna & Gethin, Trans. 2007, 16)
Now we will discuss the terms kāyika dukkha  and cetasika dukkha . With regard to 
the physical pain ( kāyika dukkha) and mental pain ( cetasika dukkha), in the Sammohavinodanī, 
the commentator explains: 
The meaning of the pain of bodily pain should be understood and the meaning of pain of 
mental pain should be understood; but here they are called pain because both of these are 
themselves pain and because they are the basis for bodily and mental pain (VibhA 105; 
Ñāṇamoli, Trans. 1996, 125).7 
The commentator further explains: This pain of body that afﬂ icts produces further pain of 
mind as well, and that accordingly is why this specially is known as pain (VibhA 105; Ñ āṇamoli, 
Trans. 1996: 126).8 This means all the conditioned states of life are pain.
Mental pain arises from various sources such as stress, interpersonal con ﬂ ict, depression, 
confusion, anger, greed, behaviour problems, separation from the beloved one, etc. According to 
Buddhist psychology, mental pain or mental illness occurs in individuals when the mind is upset 
(khitta-citta) or a psychotic ( ummatta-citta). The Pali-English Dictionary de ﬁ nes ‘khitta-citta’ as 
“one whose mind is thrown over, upset and unhinged” and ‘ummatta-citta’ is deﬁ ned as “out of one’s 
mind, mad” (Rhys Davids & Stede, Eds. 1921, 373, 550). The Pali Nikāyas mention that when one is 
touched either by bodily painful feeling (sārīrikaṁ dukkhaṁ vedanaṁ) or by mental painful feeling 
(cetasikaṁ dukkhaṁ vedanaṁ), one would go mad, go out of one’s mind (ummādam-pi pāpuṇissati 
cittakkhepa ṁ) (M I.237). 9A passage in the Pali Nik āyas mention ummattikā khittacitt ā with 
reference to a woman who went mad and lost her mind, owing to her mother’s death (M II.108-109). 
The Buddha compares khitta-citta with a ﬂ uttering ﬁ sh that is drawn from its watery abode and thrown 
upon the land ( vārijo va thale khitto okamokata ubbhato, pariphadat’ida ṃ cittaṃ māradheyyaṃ 
pahātave) (Dhp. v.34; Ud v.31.2). The Pali Nikāyas also mention two compounds ‘vikkhitta-citta’ 
and ‘byāpanna-citta’ with reference to mental disturbance. The Pali-English Dictionary de ﬁ nes 
‘vikkhitta-citta’ as “upset, perplexed, mentally upset, and confused mind” and ‘byāpanna-citta’ is 
deﬁ ned as “malevolent intention or corrupted mind” (Rhys Davids & Stede, Eds. 1118, 1375, 1469). 
The Pali Nik āyas mention distracted mind ( vikkhitta-citta) mostly with regard to mindfulness 
7 Dukkhassa dukka ṭṭho veditabbo, domanassassa dukkha ṭṭho veditabbo ti ettha pana ubhayam p’eta ṃ sayañ ca 
dukkhattā kāyikacetasikadukkhānañ ca vatthu-bhāvena dukkhan ti vuttaṃ (VibhA 105).
8  Pīleti kāyikam idaṃ, dukkhaṃ dukkhañ ca m ānassaṃ bhiyyo janayati yasm ā tasmā, dukkhan ti visesato vuttan ti  
(VibhA 105).
9  This is with reference to the individual who fails to balance their psycho-physical personality. They develop the body, 
but not the mind, or they develop the mind, but not the body.
128
Conference
meditation (See M I.59; D II.300) and ‘byāpanna-citta’ with reference to the monks who experience 
a state of unhealthy fear and terror, as an impact of a corrupted mind, bad thinking, and de ﬁ led 
intention (byāpannacitta paduṭṭhamana saṅkappasandosahetu) (M I.18).
Now we will look at abnormal behaviour that appears most in the Buddhist stories. An analysis 
of Buddhist stories shows a clear picture of different types of abnormally or mentally sick persons. 
The famous examples of psychopaths 10 of violent type are Devadatta, Aj ātasattu and Aṅgulimāla; 
and Patācāra and Kisāgotamī are the example of psychoses11. In the Jātaka stories, we ﬁ nd different 
types of abnormal behaviour. Harischnadra notes “the Bodhisatta, is told that in this world there 
are eight categories of “ ummada” meaning psychiatric disorders, namely: sexual dysfunction 
(kama-ummadaya), mania (krodha-ummadaya), hallucination (darshana-ummadaya), mental retardation 
(moha-ummadaya), possession disorder (yaksha-ummadaya), melancholia (pitta-ummadaya), alcohol 
dependence (sura-ummadaya), and depression (vyasana-ummadaya)” (Harischnadra 1998, 65-66). 
The Jātaka stories also mention of pretended madness. For example, Sujāta faked madness in order 
to relieve his father’s grief over the death of his grandfather (See Ja III.352).
In the Buddhist J ātakas stories, many cases of abnormal behaviour are said to be caused 
by sensual desires ( kāmataṅhā). For example, the As ātamanta Jātaka (Ja I.61) tells how a blind 
and aged woman fell in love with a pupil of her son and planed to kill her own son in order to have 
unhindered sex. Furthermore, Ka ṇavera J ātaka (Ja I.318), Dar īmukha J ātaka (Ja I.378), Ku ṇāla 
Jātaka (Ja II.536) and some other J ātakas indicate various psychiatric disorders which are caused 
by sexual madness . In the Milindapañha, Bhikkhu N āgasena illustrates a hermit’s madness at 
the sight of the princess Caṇḍāvati and gives a clear explanation of insanity.
Just, O king, as a madman, when out of his senses will step into a ﬁ ery furnace and take 
hold of an infuriated venomous snake, and go up to a rogue elephant, and plunge forward 
into great waters, the further shore of which he cannot see and trample through dirty pools 
and muddy places, and rush into thorny brakes and fall down precipices, and feed himself 
on ﬁ lth, and go naked through the streets, and do many other improper things (Miln II.16ff.).
This passage shows some of the characteristics of a mad person. In the Milindapañha, Bhikkhu 
Nāgasena explains to the King Milinda that the cause of abnormal behaviour is due to circumstances 
– ‘at the very sight Caṇḍāvati, the princess, the hermit went out of his mind and lost command of 
himself through love’ (Miln II.16ff.).12 Thus according to the Pali sources, some persons would suffer 
from a mental illness and physical illness due to the unusual or excessive sexual desires.
Buddhist psychology considers physical pain ( kāyika dukkha) and mental pain ( cetasika 
dukkha) as illness (or disease) ( roga): disease of the body ( kāyika roga) and disease of the mind 
(cetasika roga). With regard to disease, in the Rogasutta of the Aṅguttara Nikāya, the Buddha says: 
Monks, there are two kinds of disease. What are the two? Disease of the body and disease 
of the mind. Monks, there are to be seen beings who can claim to be physically healthy 
(free from bodily disease) for a year…two years … three years … four years … ﬁ ve years…
10  Psychopath is a person who has a serious mental illness that may cause him/her to hurt or kill other people.
11  Psychosis is a serious but treatable mental illness that affects one’s whole personality, generally including ‘loss of 
contact with reality,’ ‘false beliefs about what is taking place’ and ‘seeing or hearing things that aren’t real (hallucinations).’
12  Here it is not an exact madness, but a deviant or an abnormal behaviour of the hermit and such mental disturbance 
was caused by the beauty of the princess.
129
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
ten years … twenty years…thirty years … forty years and ﬁ fty years … who can claim to 
be healthy for a hundred years. But monks, hard to ﬁ nd are those beings who can claim to 
be mentally healthy for even a moment except for those [Arahats] whose mental cankers 
are destroyed (A IV .157).13 
According to this passage, we can say that only the Buddha and the Arahat (the Enlightened 
One) has a perfectly healthy mind, as they have destroyed all fetters. Besides the Buddha and 
the Arahat, as worldlings14 we are all afﬂ icted with mental pain.
The Girimānandasutta of the Aṅguttara Nikāya (A V .108) gives a list of forty-eight types 
of diseases: eye-disease (cakkhu-rogo), ear-disease (sota-rogo), nose-disease (ghāna-rogo), tongue 
disease (jivhā-rogo), body-disease (kāya-rogo), head-disease or headache ( sīsa-rogo), ear disease 
(or mumps) (kanna-rogo), mouth-disease (mukha-rogo), teeth-disease (or tooth-ache) (danta-rogo), 
coughs ( kāso), asthma ( sāso), colds ( pināso), burning sensation (of body or heart) ( dāha), 
fever (jaro), abdominal disease (or stomach-ache) ( kucchi-rogo), fainting ( mucchā), bloody-ﬂ ux 
(or dysentery) (pakkhandikā), piercing pain (or gripes) (sūlā), cholera (visūcikā), leprosy (kuttham), 
boils (gando), dry pustules (or plague) (kilāso), Phthisis (soso), epilepsy (apamāro), herpes (daddu), 
itching (kandū), ringworm (kacchu), small-pox (rakhasa), scabies (vitacchikā), blood-bile (or pustule) 
(lohita-pittam), diabetes (madhumeho), piles (amsā), cancer (pilakā), ulcer (or ﬁ stula) (bhagandalā); 
and afﬂ ictions due to bile (pitta-samutthānā ābādhā), due to phlegm (semha-samutthānā ābādhā), 
due to wind (vāta-samutthānā ābādhā), consisting in conﬂ ict of the humors (sannipātikā ābādhā), 
produced by change of climate ( utu-parināmajā ābādhā), by unaccustomed activity (or careless 
behavior) (visama-parihārajā ābādhā), by violence or assault ( opakkamikā), by ripeness of one’s 
kamma (kamma-vipākajā ābādhā); and cold (sītam), heat (unham), hunger (jigacchā), thirst (pipāsā), 
excrement ( uccāro), and urine ( passāvo). These forty-eight types of diseases are described in 
the Girimānandasutta according to location, type, cause and nature of diseases (See A V .108). 
The Causes of Diseases
In the Pali Nik āyas, diseases ( rogas) are considered to be caused by bile, phlegm, wind, 
bodily humors, and changes of climate, careless behaviour, assault, and kamma (A V .108). Here, 
I will brieﬂ y discuss the last four causes of diseases.
1. A change of climate ( utu-parināmajā ābādhā): It refers to the alteration in a previously 
supporting climate or environment. It may also refer to the unhealthy environmental 
that could aggravate disease i.e., unhealthy and dangerous working or living condition, 
socio-economic factors, etc.
2. Careless behaviour ( visama-parihārajā ābādhā): It means when a person fails to care 
his own mind-and-body and ignores his mental-and-physical well-being. As a result, 
13  Dve’me bhikkhave rogā. Katame dve. K āyiko ca rogo cetasiko ca rogo. Dissanti bhikkhave satt ā kāyikena rogena 
ekam pi vassaṃ ārogyaṃ paṭijānamānā, dve pi vassāni ārogyaṃ paṭijānamānā, tīṇī pi … ctt āri pi…pañca pi … dasa pi … 
vīsatim pi … ti ṃsam pi … catt ārīsam pi …  paññ āsam pi vass āni ārogyaṃ pa ṭijānamānā, vassasatam pi ārogyaṃ 
paṭijānamānā. Te bhikkhave satt ā dullabhā lokasmiṃ ye cetasikena rogena muhuttam pi ārogyaṃ paṭijānanti aññatra 
khīṇāsavehi (A IV .157).
14  ‘Worldling’, ordinary man, is any layman or monk who is still possessed of all the ten fetters binding them to 
the round of rebirths and therefore has not yet reached any of the eight stages of holiness. 
The Causes of Diseases
130
Conference
his health can get worse and he may become vulnerable to disease. Some of the careless 
behaviours are: lack of proper nutrition, lack of physical exercise, alcohol and drug 
abuse, grief, anger, etc.
3. Violence or assault ( opakkamikā): Violence or assault includes punishment, animal 
bites, assault by the enemies or robbers, self inﬂ icted injury, accident, etc.
4. Ripeness of one’s karma  (kamma-vipākajā ābādhā): The karmic effect of disease and 
health are spelled out in the Culakammavibhaṅgasutta (the shorter discourse of action) 
of the Majjhima Nikāya. According to this sutta, one who caused injuries or pain to beings 
in the present life, then wherever he is reborn he is sickly, subject to diseases – as 
a result of such bad karma (See M III.203). A solid example is Cunda, the pork butcher. 
In his whole life he slaughtered many animals. Due to this bad karma he became mad, 
crawled in his house for seven days, grunting and squealing like a pig and ﬁ nally died 
(See Dhp v.15).
Three Root Causes: Greed, Hatred, and Delusion
Buddhism explains that everything in this world, including pain of human beings, takes 
place in accordance with casual law. The origin of everything is dependent, conditional and relative. 
Buddhist psychology describes three “root causes”– greed ( lobha), hatred ( dosa), and delusion 
(moha) – that give rise to pain. For example, the Majjhima Nikāya states: “Greed (lobha) is a root 
of the unwholesome; hated ( dosa) is the root of the unwholesome; delusion ( moha) is the root of 
the unwholesome. This is called the root of the unwholesome” (M I.47).15 
1. Greed ( lobha): It is what is greedy ( lubbhatī ti lobho ). It has the characteristic of sticking 
to the object or wanting an object (Abhidh-s- ṭ 83). According to the Buddhist psychology, 
the ﬁ rst unwholesome root, greed (lobha), covers all levels of desire or thirst (taṇhā) and clinging 
(upādāna). It overlaps the inclination for sensual lust (kāmarāga) and attachment to existence 
(bhavarāga). The related wholesome basic tendency is non-greed (alobha).
2. Hatred ( dosa): It is what does harm ( dussatī ti doso ). It has the characteristic of anger like 
a poisonous snake when struck (Abhidh-s-ṭ 83). It covers aversion (paṭigha) and ill-will (vyāpāda); 
and always accompanied by mental painful feeling (domanassa vedanā). It also includes a variety 
of negative emotions namely, denying, grudging, disappointment, dejection, anxiety, despair, 
etc. The root of hatred is likening to latent tendency of aversion ( paṭighānusaya) which is 
the basis for craving for non-existence (vibhava-taṅhā). The related wholesome basic tendency 
is non-hatred (adosa).
3. Delusion ( moha): It is that which is deluded about the objects; it is misunderstanding (ārammaṇe 
muyhatī ti moho, añāṇaṃ). It has the characteristic of concealing the nature of the object, for 
although occurring by way of taking hold of the object (Abhidh-s- ṭ 82). It covers the latent 
tendency of ignorance ( avijjānusaya), blindness to certain facets of reality, such as the three 
characteristics: impermanence (anicca), pain (dukkha), and non-self (anatta). At the cognitive 
level, it accesses our perceptions, thoughts, and views. The related wholesome basic tendency 
is non-delusion (amoha).
15  Katamañ c’ āvuso akusalamūlaṁ: Lobho akusalamūlaṁ, doso akusalam ūlaṁ, moho akusalam ūlaṁ. Idaṁ vuccat’ 
āvuso akusalamūlaṁ (M I.47).
Three Root Causes: Greed, Hatred, and Delusion
131
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
These three roots are said to be clouded our perception and lead to unhealthy mentalities. 
From these three roots arise states of pain, unhappiness, aversion, anger, doubt, upset, etc. It is our 
own reinforcement of those negative emotions that makes them so much worse. 
Buddhist Path to Overcoming Physical and Mental Pain
In Buddhism, freedom from physical and mental pain is described in eight elements known 
as the Noble Eightfold Path namely, Right Understanding, Right Purpose, Right Speech, Right 
Action, Right Livelihood, Right Effort, Right Mindfulness, and Right Concentration. This Path 
consists of the practice of morality (sīla), the practice of concentration (samādhi), and the development 
of wisdom (paññā). The moral aspects of the Eightfold Path, consists of Right Speech, Right Action 
and Right Livelihood represents the ethical foundation of the Buddhist path. Here, the word “right” 
concerns taking responsibility for one’s speech, actions, livelihood and mental attitudes so that one 
gains a sense of inner happiness.
As long as physical and mental pain is considered, we can use Buddhist ethical teaching 
as a primary approach to mental healing. Some of these ethical teaching include controlling of 
unwanted thoughts by distraction, training in social skill, observing precept, offering gifts, etc. 
Ethical guidelines, which have to do with the person’s interactions with other beings, help the person 
to avoid actions that lead to mental pain i.e., guilt, shame, remorse and other unpleasant mental states.
In the context of ethics, the Buddha counsels people to re ﬂ ect on the consequences of 
their actions before proceeding and to abstain from unwholesome actions that are not conducive 
to happiness for one’s self and others (M I.55). In Buddhism, there are two terms related to ethical 
arguments: wholesome (kusala) and unwholesome (akusala). These two terms can be called action 
(kamma). Kamma as “action” is deﬁ ned by the word cetanā: “Bhikkhus, volition (cetanā), I say, is 
kamma. Having willed, we create kamma, through body, speech, and mind” (A III.415).16 Buddhism 
points out that one  must be careful in carrying out one’s action. According to Buddhism, there are 
ten unwholesome actions (dasa- kusala-kamma) and ten wholesome actions (dasa-akusala-kamma). 
The ten unwholesome actions are: killing living beings ( pānātipātā), taking what is not given 
(adinnādānā), sensual misconduct (kamesumicchācārā), lying speech (musāvādā), divisive speech 
(pisunavācā), harsh speech (pharusavācā), idle speech (samphappalāpa), covetousness (abhijjhā), 
ill-will (vyāpāda), and holding wrong view (micchādiṭṭhi). Brieﬂ y put, the ten wholesome actions 
are the opposite of the ten unwholesome actions. Such actions are called unwholesome as they 
yielding pain, ripening in pain. Thus, freedom from physical and mental pain consists primarily of 
progressive stages of mental culture culminating in the attainment of emancipation of the mind from 
all unwholesome states that deﬁ le it and produce unending misery for the person.
Furthermore, it is believed that that various types of disease can be cured or minimised 
through the seven factors of awakening ( satta-bojjhaṅgas): mindfulness ( sati), investigation of 
the dharma (dhamma-vicaya), energy (vīriya), joy (pīti), calm or tranquility (passaddhi), concentration 
(samādhi), and equanimity (upekkhā) (S V .63-64). For example, the Buddha states, “Kassapa, these 
seven awakening factors are well expounded by me, cultivated and much developed by me and when 
cultivated and much developed, they conduce to full realization, to wisdom, to Nibbāna” (S V .79). 
16 Cetanahaṃ bhikkhave kammaṃ vadāmi; cetayitvā kammaṃ karoti kāyena vācāya manasā (A III.415).
Buddhist Path to Overcoming Physical and Mental Pain
132
Conference
Receiving and accepting the full teaching of the seven factors of enlightenment Kassapa there and 
then recovered from that sickness. He regained his physical and mental health. Therefore, these 
seven factors of enlightenment can also be used to heal physical and mental pain.
Apart from these seven awakening factors, loving-kindness (mettā) meditation is helpful in 
reducing pain i.e., negative emotions and feelings such as anger, jealousy and hatred and to strengthen 
positive relationships and self-esteem in people. It also gives security mentally and physically to 
a person to minimize his pain. In addition to loving-kindness (mettā), there are three other wholesome 
mental qualities namely, compassion (karuṇā), appreciative joy (muditā), and equanimity (upekkhā). 
The Buddha describes these four wholesome mental qualities as the four sublime states (brahma-vihāra) 
and immeasurable minds (appamāṇa). They are fundamental functions in developing all the other 
types of wholesome qualities, such as generosity and honesty. Therefore, these four minds can be 
practiced by people inﬂ icted with physical and mental pain.
Mindfulness and the Therapeutic Relationship
The Pali term for ‘mindfulness’ is ‘sati’, which is related to the verb ‘sarati’, to remember. 
Etymologically ‘sati’ is derived from the Sanskrit ‘ smṛti’, which means memory, recognition, 
mindfulness, alertness, remembrance, attentiveness etc. (See Sumanacara 2010, for discussion).
Mindfulness has been described for psychotherapy includes being aware, intentionally, being 
acceptance and compassion in which each thought, feeling, or sensation that arises is acknowledged 
and accepted as it is. It is a paying attention to the arising and disappearing of thoughts, feelings, 
and perceptions within all human beings.  Thich Nhat Hanh, a meditation guru and peacemaker, 
describes the essence of mindfulness in a radio interview:
Mindfulness is a part of living. When you are mindful, you are fully alive, you are fully 
present. You can get in touch with the wonders of life that can nourish you and heal you. And 
you are stronger; you are more solid in order to handle the suffering inside you and around 
you. When you are mindful, you can recognize, embrace and handle the pain, the sorrow in 
you and around you to bring you relief. And if you continue with concentration and insight, 
you’ll be able to transfer the suffering inside and help transform the suffering around you.17
Elsewhere Thich Nhat Hanh de ﬁ nes mindfulness as “remembering to come back to 
the present moment” (Hanh 1998, 59). Nyanaponika Thera describes mindfulness as “the clear 
and single-minded awareness of what actually happens to us and in us at the successive moments 
of perception” (Nyanaponika Thera 1972, 5). Jon Kabat-Zinn, a founding director of the Stress 
Reduction Clinic and the Center for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care, and Society at 
the University of Massachusetts Medical schoold, emphasizes the present moment awareness and 
the nonjudgemental aspect of mindfulness: “the awareness that emerges through paying attention 
on purpose, in the present moment, and nonjudgmentally to the unfolding of experience moment to 
moment” (Kabat-Zinn, 2003, 145). It is present moment awareness because with mindfulness one 
reﬂ ects only what is presently happening and in exactly the way it is happening. Larry Rosenberg 
(1998, 15), a meditation trainer, compares mindfulness to a mirror simply re ﬂ ecting what is there. 
Thus, Mindfulness is about cultivating, sustaining, and integrating a way of paying attention to 
17  Retrieved from http://being.publicradio.org/programs/thichnhathanh/transcript.shtml.
Mindfulness and the Therapeutic Relationship
133
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
the ebb and ﬂ ow of emotions, thoughts, and perceptions within all human beings. The qualities of 
Mindfulness are:
1. Present-centered: Mindfulness is always in the present moment. It engages continually observing 
the objects of meditation, moment-by-moment.
2.  Choice less awareness: Mindfulness is a choice less conscious effort as meditation object at the 
present moment can be one any one of these four: body, feelings, thoughts, and mental objects. 
3.  Nonjudgemental: Mindfulness is paying attention nonjudgementally to what goes on in the 
present moment – in our body and mind, and our surroundings. When one is mindful, the atten-
tion is focused on the present so judgment cannot be placed.
4. Acceptance: From the mindfulness perspective, acceptance refers to welcoming every feelings 
or experiences as they arise – without regarding the pleasant or unpleasant qualities of the object. 
5.  Letting go: Mindfulness is letting go – the natural consequence of a willingness to accept things 
as they are, as they appear to be.
6.  Clear comprehension: Mindfulness is seeing the object of meditation thoroughly and all its 
aspects. 
7.  Investigative: Mindfulness awareness is always investigating subtler levels of feeling and 
perception.
8.  Liberating: Mindfulness is liberating as every moment of mindful awareness provides insights 
and freedom from the causes of pain. 
These qualities can be found in most discussion of mindfulness in both the psychotherapy 
and the Buddhist literature. They occur simultaneously in each moment of mindfulness. Mindfulness 
meditation includes mindfulness of body ( kāya), feelings ( vedanā), consciousness ( citta), and 
mental objects (dhamma). However, traditionally it is often stated with concentration on the breath 
(ānāpānasati).
Mindfulness-based interventions suggest that the therapists who teach the meditation should 
practice mindfulness themselves. Mindfulness helps to a therapist’s skill to accomplish a sense of 
the client’s inner understanding; communicate awareness of that felt sense; and give words to their 
feelings and sensations. In a mindfulness condition, therapists are better able to observe thoughts, 
feelings, and sensations without emotion and attachment. This calm state of self-experience may 
enable therapists to react to situations more deliberately. In addition, therapist manners should be 
characterised by kindness, acceptance, support, and genuineness. Thomas Bien notes that “Mindful 
therapy is therapy in which the therapist produces true presence and deep listening. It is not technique 
drive” (2006, 217). This shows the role of mindfulness in cultivating presence and listening within 
the client-therapist relationship.
For the most effective treatment, cultivating an awareness of and a compassionate response 
to the suffering of others is central to the teachings of Thich Nhat Hanh. He notes: “When we are 
mindful, touching deeply the present moment, we can see and listen deeply, and the fruits are always 
understanding, acceptance, love, and the desire to relieve suffering and bring joy” (Hanh 1995, 14). 
134
Conference
Active listening is another important tool for effective therapy as listening voice is the primary form 
of care. Thus, within the client-therapist relationship, mindfulness is a way of paying attention with 
compassion, attendance, and attentive listening that can be developed, maintained, and integrated 
into our work as therapists during the ongoing discipline of meditation practice.
Conclusion
The aim of Buddhism is to end the pain of the human beings. Buddhism teaches that mind 
should be puriﬁ ed in order to get rid of pain. In this paper, we have analysed the concept of physical 
and mental pain according to the Pali Nik āyas. We have highlighted how three evil roots (greed, 
hatred, and delusion) cause disturbances on physical and mental life. We have suggested that Buddhist 
ethical teachings and mindfulness meditation can be helpful to overcome mental and physical pain. 
Mindfulness lies at the heart of Buddhist psychology. We have highlighted that mindfulness 
is a comprehensive approach that promotes wholesome mental states in an individual’s life, and 
helps one to overcome physical and mental pain. Though we have described mindfulness by using 
a number of terms, the experience of mindfulness cannot be captured in words. Hence it cannot be 
precisely described using words or language. Most of all, mindfulness actually must be experience 
to be understood. 
In conclusion, freedom from pain is the result of following the spiritual path, practicing 
the Noble Eightfold Path, living a virtuous and ethical life, developing the four immeasurable 
minds (brahmavihāra) and mindfulness. Each of these trainings and practices help us to know 
and let go of unwholesome roots from the mind. The pain ceases when one has eradicated all 
deﬁ lements ( kilesas) by means of the three trainings: ethical behaviour ( sīla), concentration 
(samādhi) and wisdom (paññā). 
Conclusion
135
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Abbreviations:
A  A ṅguttara Nikāya
Abhidh-s  Abhidhammatthasa ṅgaha
Abhidh-s-ṭ Abhidhammatthavibh āvinī-ṭīkā
Dhp  Dhammapada 
D  D īgha Nikāya
Ja  J ātaka
M  Majjhimanik āya
Miln  Milindapañha
S  Sa ṃyutta Nikāya
VibhA  Vibha ṅga Aṭṭhakathā (Sammohavinodanī)
Pali Sources:
Abhidhammasaṅgaha and Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā (1989). Saddh ātissa, H. (Ed.) Oxford: 
Pali Text Society. 
Aṅguttaranikāya (1885-1900). Morris, R. & Hardy, E. (Eds.), (vols. I-V). London: Pali Text Society. 
Dhammapada (1995). von Hinüber, O. & Norman,  K. R. (Eds.). London: Pali Text Society. 
Dīghanikāya (1890-1976). Rhys Davids, T. W. & Carpenter, J. E. (Eds.), (vols. I-III). London: Pali 
Text Society. 
Jātaka (1962-1964). Fausboll, V . (Ed.), (vols. I-VII). London: Pali Text Society. 
Majjhimanikāya (1948-1951). Trenckner, V . & Chalrners, R. (Eds.), (vols. I-III). London: Pali Text 
Society. 
Milindapañha (1928). Trenckner, V . (Ed.). London: Pali Text Society. 
Saṃyuttanikāya (1884-1904). Feer, L. (Ed.), (vols. I-VI). London: Pali Text Society. 
Vibhaṅga Aṭṭhakathā (Sammohavinodanī) (1980). Buddhadatta, A. P. (Ed.). London: Pali Text Society.
Translations and General Sources:
Bien, T.  (2006). Mindful therapy: A guide for therapists and helping professionals. Boston: Wisdom. 
Bodhi, B. (Ed.). 2006 (1993). Comprehensive manual of Abhidhamma: The philosophical psychology 
of Buddhism [Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha]. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Abbreviations:
Pali Sources:
Translations and General Sources:
136
Conference
Gombrich, R. (1995). Theravada Buddhism: A social history from ancient Benares to modern 
Colombo. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, Ltd. (1988).
Hanh, T. H. (1998). The heart of the Buddha’s teaching. Berkeley: Parallex Press.
Hanh, T. H. (1995). Living Buddha, living Christ. New York: Riverhead Books.
Kabt-Zinn, J. (2003). Mindfulness-based interventions in context: Past, Present, and future. Clinical 
Psychology: Science and Practice, 10(2), 144-156.
Ñāṇamoli, B. (1996). The dispeller of delusion [Sammohavinodanī] Trans. London: Pali Text Society.
Nyanaponika T. 1992 (1962). The heart of Buddhist meditation. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Nyanatiloka T. (1970). Buddhist dictionary. Singapore: Singapore Buddhist Meditation Centre.
Nyanatiloka T. 1998 (1949). Abhidhamma studies. Boston: Wisdom Publications. 
Nyanatiloka T. (1972). The power of mindfulness. San Fransisco: Unity Press.
Pe Maung, T. (1976). The Expositor [Atthasālinī] Trans, 2 vols. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Rosenberg, L. (1998). Breath by breath : The liberating practice of insight meditation . Boston: 
Shambhala Press.
Rhys Davids, T. W. & Stede, W. (Eds.). 1993 (1921-25). Pali-English Dictionary. London: Pali 
Text Society. 
Sumanacara, A. (2010). Reﬂ ections on mental disease and the Buddhist approach to mental health. 
Global recovery: The Buddhist perspective , 519-537. UNDV Vesak conference volume, 
Thailand.
Wijeratne, R.P. and Gethin, R. (2007). Summary of the topic of Abhidhamma and exposition of 
the topics of Abhidhamma [Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha and Abhidhammatthavibhāvinī-ṭīkā] 
Trans. London: Pali Text Society.
137
Mental Illness according to Theravada Buddhism
Towards a Theory of Mental Illness Based upon 
the Buddha´s Teachings
Bhikkhu Nandisena1
Introduction:
An important contribution of Buddhism to the science of mental health and its treatment 
of mental illness would be to provide a “theory” that accurately describes reality. Considering that 
according to one recent report2 by the World Health Organization (WHO), within the next 20 years 
more people will be suffering from depression than any other health problem, the matter of 
understanding what really is mental illness is of the utmost importance if we are to ﬁ nd a successful 
treatment. 
Meaning of Illness
In the Pali Canon there are various words 3 used to describe what in English is called 
“illness,” “disease,” “sickness.” 
Among these, the most commonly used words are roga, by ādhi and ābādha. Since there 
is a discourse where the Buddha utilizes the word roga to describe different kinds of illness, and 
considering that all these terms, according to the ancient Pali grammarians, 4 are synonyms, for 
the purpose of this paper I take this word as a representative of the Pali language to describe what 
in English is called “illness,” “disease,” “sickness.”
The word roga, which is derived from a root that has the meaning of breaking up and 
dissolution,5 is explained as that which afﬂ icts either the major or minor constituents of the body.6 
From what has been said it is clear that the meaning of illness in Theravada Buddhism is primarily 
related to what we call “physical illness.” To further strengthen this argument it is worth to note that 
the word roga seems to be closely related to rūpa, form, matter, since the characteristic of matter is 
the apparent change and oppression.7 
1  Bhikkhu Nandisena is the Abbot of the Dhamma Vihara, Mexico, and Spiritual Director of Buddhismo Theravada México AR. 
More information about him can be found in this link: https://docs.google.com/Doc?docid=ah7ht8cdqj64_135mm7cqc&hl=en.
2  See http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/health/8230549.stm. 
3  The following seven words are canonical: roga (D. i 10), ābādha (D. ii 84), ātaṅka (Sn. 427), by ādhi (D. ii 245), 
gelaññā (D. ii 84), rujā (Ap. ii 138), akalla (T. ii 428). Also found in the Pali literature are amaya, gada; see (Sad. ii 11). 
A list of the abbreviations used for the references is provided at the end.
4  See Sad. ii 11.
5  The root is ruja which is glossed as bha ṅga. See Sad. ii 48.
6  Rogo ti rujati bhañjati a ṅgapaccaṅgānī ti rogo. Sad. ii 48.
7  According to Sad. ii 234, the root r ūpa has the meanings of “changing,” “striking,” and “oppressing.”
Meaning of Illness
Introduction:
138
Conference
Two Kinds of Illness
Although the meaning of illness is primarily associated with the physical body, there is 
evidence in the Pali Canon that the Buddha clearly distinguished two kinds of illness: physical illness 
(kāyiko rogo) and mental illness (cetasiko rogo).8 While physical illness is classiﬁ ed and attributed to 
different causes,9 the Buddha seems to attribute mental illness to just one cause:10 the manifestation 
of mental deﬁ lements in the mind of beings.11 
Here it should be mentioned that even though mental illness manifests itself through 
the mind, this does not exclude the existence of physiological conditions among mental illnesses. 
But the deﬁ ning characteristic of a mental illness is, as the Buddha said, the manifestation of mental 
deﬁ lements. How these mental de ﬁ lements arise in the mind of beings can be traced to different 
conditions as it will be shown later.
Why two kinds of illness? Because there are only two conditioned ultimate realities,12 mind 
and matter.13 Therefore it is clear that the twofold classiﬁ cation of physical illness and mental illness 
is directly related to the conditioned ultimate realities rather than to the conventional or consensual 
reality.14
The Meaning of Mental Illness
In Buddhism the manifestation of mental deﬁ lements in the mind of an individual is the basic 
criterion to determine the existence of mental illness. In the Abhidhamma the mental de ﬁ lements, 
which are states that af ﬂ ict and de ﬁ le the mind of beings, 15 are globally included in the category 
of unwholesome states (akusal ā dhamm ā).16 They are called unwholesome because they are 
(1) mentally unhealthy, (2) morally blameworthy, (3) unskillful, and (4) productive of painful 
results.17 Since the unwholesome states always arise depending on other states, they are conditioned, 
8  A i 460, Roga Sutta.
9  In Nd. i 10, 13-14, 281, there is a list of eight physical diseases according to their causes: (1) caused by bile 
(pittasamuṭ ṭ hā na), (2) caused by phlegm (semhasamu ṭ ṭ hā na), (3) caused by wind (v ā tasamuṭ ṭ hā na), (4) caused by 
an imbalance of the humors (sannip ā tikā ), (5) caused by the change of weather, seasons (utupariṇ ā maja), (6) caused by 
a lack of care of the body (visamaparih ā raja), (7) external, sudden attack (opakkamika) and (8) caused by the result of 
kamma (kammavipā kaja).
10  N.B. In this paper the word “cause” is used to indicate only the relation between mental illness and the arising of 
mental deﬁ lements.
11  “Bhikkhus, those beings who admit to be freed from mental illness even for a moment are difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd in the world, 
except those who have destroyed the contaminants.” A. i 460.
12  Paramattha-sacca. See D.A. iii  166. Although in the Abhidhamma literature mind (n āma) is considered to be 
composed of consciousness (citta) and mental factors (cetasika)—both ultimate realities—, since both have the nature of 
taking an object and are immaterial, for the purpose of this paper they are taken as only one ultimate reality.
13  D. iii 178, Sa ṅgiti Sutta. D. iii 228–Dasuttara Sutta. Here it is said that mind (n āma) and matter (r ūpa) should be 
completely comprehended, which means that these two dhammas are included in the First Noble Truth, the Noble Truth 
of Suffering.
14  There are two kinds of speech used by the Buddha: (1) conventional speech (sammutikath ā) and ultimate reality 
speech (paramatthakathā). See D.A. i 315. Regarding the term sammuti-sacca see Pañcappakaraṇa-aṭṭhakathā 187. 
15  The technical term kilesa has the meanings of af ﬂ icting, obstructing (b ādhana), tormenting (upat āpa), hindering 
(vibādhana), and deﬁ ling (kilissana). For the ﬁ rst three meanings see Sad. ii 179, 238, 255. For the last meaning see Ps.A. i 292.
16  Dhs. 1.
17  See Dhs.A. 80-81. The unwholesome states are the opposite of the wholesome states which are mentally healthy 
(ārogya), morally blameless (anavajja), skillful (cheka), and productive of happy results (sukhavipāka).
The Meaning of Mental Illness
139
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
and as such they are impermanent.18 And because they hold their own intrinsic nature, they belong 
to the domain of ultimate realities.19 
With the information that has been gathered we can summarize the meaning of mental illness 
in Buddhism as follows:
• Mental illness is determined by the manifestation of mental de ﬁ lements
• Mental illness is impermanent
• Mental illness is conditioned
• Mental illness is an ultimate reality
Diff ering Interpretations of Mental Illness between 
Buddhism and Western Science
When attempting to determine the meaning of mental illness or mental disorder20 according 
to modern psychology and medical science, we will ﬁ nd a broad spectrum of opinion including, 
among others, psychological and behavioral patterns which differ from the norm; disruptions in 
an individual’s thinking, feelings, moods; inability to relate to others. We will also ﬁ nd different 
criteria for classifying mental disorders, 21 and regarding their treatment, options ranging from 
psychotherapy to psychiatric medication to other methods.
Undoubtedly the merits of each system of treatment should be determined by its ability to 
cure or improve the mental condition of the patient. But when statistics show that mental disorders 
are among the most expensive medical conditions,22 and that within the next 20 years more people 
will be suffering from depression than any other health problem,23 the matter of understanding mental 
illness comes to the forefront if we are to ﬁ nd a successful treatment.
Depression, according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM 
IV-TR), belongs to the group of “mood disorders” or “affective disorders” because it is characterized 
by a pervasive low mood. Common symptoms of depression are mental states of sadness, irritability, 
frustration, feelings of worthlessness, guilt, low self-esteem, hopelessness, despair, as well as 
insomnia, ruminating thoughts, fatigue, and so on.
From the perspective of Buddhism this approach, based on a group of the symptoms to 
pinpoint and name a particular mental disorder, while quite efﬁ cient at what it does, seems to miss 
18  See Sa ṅkhatalakkhaṇ a Sutta (A. i 150) and Commentary. This applies to all conditioned states, wholesome (kusala), 
unwholesome (akusala) and indeterminate (abyākata).
19  In the Dasuttara Sutta (D. iii 229) a term used to describe mind and matter is bh ūta, real. The Commentary glosses 
this term as sabhāvato vijjamānā, (things) existing according to their own intrinsic nature. The Sub-commentary adds that 
this refers to the ultimate realities. See  D.A. iii 241 and D.Ṭ. iii 280.
20  This is the term most commonly used nowadays.
21  The two main systems of classi ﬁ cation are (1) The ICD-10 Chapter V: Mental and behavioural disorders used by 
the World Health Organization (WHO) and (2) the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR) 
used by the American Psychiatric Association (APA).
22  This is for the USA. The study name is “National Health Spending by Medical Condition, 1996-2005” by Dr. Charles 
Roehrig of Ann Arbor, Michigan-based Altarum Institute.
23 According to a recent report by the World Health Organization. See note 2.
Diff ering Interpretations of Mental Illness between 
Buddhism and Western Science
140
Conference
the fact that it is dealing with concepts, eternalizing for later treatment something that it is just 
persistently and recurrently impermanent. 24 That is so because conventional reality is built upon 
the ultimate reality or as an ancient Buddhist sage said, concepts only exist in the form of shadows 
of the ultimate realities.25  
Conditions, Ultimate Reality and Conventional Reality
While the common symptoms of depression could be identiﬁ ed with unwholesome mental 
states  that are ultimate realities, packaging all of them with the label of depression represents 
an intellectual leap to grasp something that can be only grasped by taking its individual components. 
There is no depression apart from its components. And there are no components without conditions. 
Now that we have these three realms, (1) the realm of conditions, (2) the realm of 
the components of a mental disorder, and (3) the realm of the mental disorder itself, it would be 
important to understand what each of these three realms represents. The last realm, the realm of 
the mental disorder, is a mere conventional reality, a packaging of concepts pointing to a global 
name concept such as depression or phobia. The middle realm consists of the components which are 
the real thing because name concepts such as anxiety or guilt or sadness, if correctly identiﬁ ed, point 
to the ultimate realities of the mind. The ﬁ rst realm consists of the various conditions that could 
make these components, the ultimate realities, arise in the mind of a being. These conditions can be 
material, when, for example, a certain mental disorder is related to a brain tumor or another physical 
disease, or mental, when views, perceptions and mental attitudes in ﬂ uence the way an individual 
relates to a certain experience; or both material and mental; or even concepts. Also ethics can be 
a powerful condition of the mental states that arise in the mind of a being.26  
Recognizing the Ultimate Realities
Perhaps one of the biggest stumbling blocks for understanding mental illness is the assumption 
that the mind is just a function of the brain. This assumption is not only contrary to the insight of 
the Buddha that mind and matter are two different ultimate realities, but also stands between us and 
a correct understanding of mental illness.
The assumption that mind and matter, although depending on each other, are equally real27
on the ultimate sense, qualiﬁ es to what Buddhists call “Right View,”28 the indispensable ingredient 
or prerequisite to arriving at a correct understanding of reality.
24  It seems that during the period of dreamless sleep and during many moments of waking consciousness there are no 
symptoms and, therefore, no mental disorder. However, when the symptoms and the mental disorder are conceptualized, 
that fact seems to be missed and not taken into account.
25  See Abhidhammattha Sa ṅgaha by Anuruddha page 57. The phrase paramatthato avijjam ānā pi atthacch āyākārena 
cittuppādānamārammaṇabhūtā, can be literally translated as “although (concepts) do no exist as ultimate realities, they 
are objects of consciousness as shadows of (ultimate) things.”
26  There cannot be mental health without ethics. That is why it is said that virtue or ethics (s īla) is a precondition of 
concentration (sam ādhi) and wisdom (paññ ā). See  S. i 13. Here concentration and wisdom should be considered as 
mental health.
27  Bh ūta. See note 19.
28  Samm ā-diṭṭhi. See D. iii 224.
Recognizing the Ultimate Realities
Conditions, Ultimate Reality and Conventional Reality
141
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Without this assumption which recognizes the two ultimate realities of mind and matter, we 
may err in identifying the components of a mental disorder by what they really are, that is, the cause29
of the mental disorder, and there also might be confusion between what are conditions and causes 
of mental disorders. Furthermore, there is the risk of “freezing” a mental disorder as a category of 
a system of classiﬁ cation that then has alternative methods of treatment according to the school of 
thought professed by whoever happens to take that case.
Understanding Mental Illness
Given the fact that depression is on the rise and more common than much-feared physical 
diseases such as cancer and HIV-AIDS, let us take this mental disorder and explore it using 
the paradigm that we have set forth so far.
Regarding the symptoms of depression, before we mentioned sadness, irritability, frustration, 
feelings of worthlessness, guilt, low self-esteem, hopelessness, despair, etc. There may be other 
symptoms, but from the perspective of Buddhism, the ﬁ rst observation we have to make is that all 
those symptoms are associated with a particular type of mental feeling (vedanā), that is, displeasure 
or unpleasant feeling.30 
According to the Abhidhamma, any mental state associated with unpleasant mental feeling 
is included within the unwholesome root of aversion (dosa). Here it should be mentioned that 
the term dosa comprises states ranging from mild aversion to rage, including in-between states 
such as ill will, fear, anxiety, boredom, annoyance, etc. The rule here is to include any mental state 
associated with unpleasant feeling within this root. The unpleasant mental feeling, unlike the pleasant 
and neutral feelings, has the peculiarity that it is always unwholesome and it is invariably associated 
with the root of aversion.31 Although we are including the different symptoms of depression within 
the root of aversion, it should be said that they may correspond to other particular unwholesome 
mental states. However, they all, because of being associated with unpleasant mental feeling, are 
grouped together with the root of aversion.
This ﬁ rst observation regarding the symptoms of depression can be summed up as follows:
• They are associated with unpleasant mental feeling
• They may be distinct, identi ﬁ able unwholesome mental states
• They are all grouped within the mental root of aversion
• They are always unwholesome mental states
• They are ultimate realities of the mind
Why do these symptoms arise? To answer this question we have to move from the middle 
realm of the components of the mental disorder, to the ﬁ rst realm, the realm of conditions.
29  See note 10.
30  Domanassasahagatacittupp ādā. See Dhs. 266. 
31  All this is taken from the Canonical Abhidhamma and later literature. Recommended reading A Comprehensive 
Manual of Abhidhamma, Bhikkhu Bodhi-General Editor (BPS 1993, First Edition). 
Understanding Mental Illness
142
Conference
As it was said, there may be various and multiple conditions for these symptoms to arise. 
Using the categories of Buddhism, the conditions may be grouped as (1) material, (2) mental, 
(3) both mental and material, and (4) concepts. 
Bearing in mind that in the absence of conditions, there are no symptoms, it is clear that 
a great deal of attention should be paid to identify these conditions. However, in many cases this 
may not be simple for various reasons. Even when conditions have been identi ﬁ ed, the question 
remains of the degree of certainty of the connection between the conditions and the symptoms. 
As an assessment is made, it may be possible to catalog the different cases in the categories mentioned. 
And from there we should proceed to deal with the conditions in order to eliminate or reduce them. 
In this realm of conditions undoubtedly science has an important role to play because this is a realm 
of discovery and possibility. Finally, it should be said that even when some of these conditions may 
be inevitable, they are still just conditions, not ﬁ xed, determined causes. This last point will become 
clearer when we deal with the third observation.
This second observation regarding the conditions of depression can be summarized as follows:
• It may be possible to identify them
• They could be grouped in four categories
• Once identi ﬁ ed and grouped they should be removed or reduced
• Science has an important role to play in the realm of conditions
• Even when they may be inevitable, they are never determined causes
The third observation has to do with the nature of the symptoms. In the ﬁ rst observation 
we mentioned that the symptoms of depression can be related to the ultimate reality of mind, or, 
to be more speci ﬁ c, to the contents of consciousness. Also we were able to identify that all those 
symptoms, as many or diverse as they may be, have only one mental feeling associated with them: 
unpleasant feeling. The unpleasant mental feeling is always associated with unwholesome states 
rooted in aversion. If this is true, we come to the astonishing discovery that depression, unlike physical 
illness in general, is an illness of choice.
Let us elaborate brieﬂ y on this. The nature of wholesome states is that they belong to our 
own domain.32 And regarding the unwholesome states, which deﬁ ne depression, they arise because 
we choose to have them arise. Therefore, when it comes to wholesome and unwholesome states,  
there is free will. The exercise of free will is directly related to Right View. Independent of the 
conditions, it ultimately depends on the individual to have a wholesome or unwholesome state of 
consciousness. From the Abhidhamma standpoint, what we have called the realm of conditions 
belongs to the indeterminate states 33 which include the resultant, functional, and matter—they do  
not belong to the category of present wholesome or unwholesome states.34
32  It depends on us to have wholesome states.
33  This is the last member (aby ākata dhammā) of the ﬁ rst triplet of the Dhs. The realm of conditions, as it was said, may 
also include concepts. In theory also past wholesome and unwholesome states can be a condition of present wholesome 
and unwholesome states, however, it seems that the material and resultant states have greater in ﬂ uence as conditions of 
mental illness. 
34  These are the ﬁ rst two members of the ﬁ rst triplet of the Dhs. 
143
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Since the components of depression only belong to the category of unwholesome states, 
it could be said that depression is an auto-generated mental disorder. In brief the mechanism of 
depression could be described as an individual’s unskillful reactions to certain adverse conditions 
in the present moment.
From what has been said, it follows that a treatment for depression would consist of teaching 
the individual to skillfully relate to the various adverse conditions experienced in the present moment. 
Of course this does not exclude different treatments to deal with the conditions, but by now it should 
be clear what is possible in each of the three realms and where the main focus should be.  
Final Considerations
In this paper I have set forth a theory of mental illness based on the material  found in 
the Pali Canon and related literature. This theory takes into account the ultimate realities of mind and 
matter and also conditionality—concepts have been indispensable for conveying all the interactions. 
According to this theory, consciousness is an ever- ﬂ owing stream since the moment 
of conception to the moment of death, and then it would continue in another life. This stream 
of consciousness is continuously changing according to the type of consciousness we experience 
through the six sense-doors, 35 and also depending on the mental states associated with these 
door-consciousness. As the Buddha said, we are mentally ill only when de ﬁ lements associate 
with the stream of consciousness. Mental de ﬁ lements are not an intrinsic part of the stream of 
consciousness but rather are considered “guests.”36 
Under the heading “Understanding Mental Illness” we applied this theory to explore one 
mental disorder, namely, depression. The same method could be equally used to study other mental 
disorders belonging to the group of mood disorders. Regarding psychotic disorders and other severe 
delusional disorders, though the theory should still hold true, the weight of the equation seems to 
move so much to the realm of conditions, that the probability of a successful treatment should be 
radically diminished. 
We mentioned that one of the biggest obstacles for understanding mental illness was 
the assumption that the mind is a function of the brain. Taking into account that equating the mind 
with the brain is a mainstream scienti ﬁ c position—a position rejected by the Buddha as a wrong 
view—, it becomes clear that this view has a much larger and encompassing inﬂ uence, touching even 
the ﬁ eld of ethics. Therefore, when discussing Buddhism and Science, the ontological assumptions 
of science should be contrasted with what Buddhists call Right View, not just for the purpose of 
comparing them, but also to try to open new windows to the understanding of reality. 
35  And doorless-conscioussness (dvāra-vimutta-citta). See Sīlakkhandhavagga-abhinavaṭīkā ii 108.
36  In Dh.A.  i 15, the term used is āgantuka, guests, because they associate sporadically with different types of 
consciousness. 
Final Considerations
144
Conference
Abbreviations of References
D.  i  D īgha Nikāya-V olume I–Sīlakkhandhavagga
D. iii  D īgha Nikāya-V olume III–Pāthikavagga
S. i  Sa ṁyutta Nikāya I–Sagāthāvaggasaṁyutta-pāḷi
S. iii  Sa ṁyutta Nikāya III–Mahāvaggasaṁyutta-pāḷi 
A. i   A ṅguttara Nikāya I–Ekaka-duka-tika-catukka-nipāta-pāḷi 
Sn.  Suttanip āta-pāḷi 
T. ii  Ther īgāthā-pāḷi 
Ap. ii  Apad āna-pāḷi II
Nd. i  Mah āniddesa-pāḷi 
Dhs.   Dhammasa ṅgaṇī-pāḷi 
D.A. iii  Commentary of the D īgha Nikāya-Pāthikavagga-aṭṭhakathā
Dh.A.  Commentary of the Dhammapada
Dhs.A.   Commentary of the Dhammasa ṅgaṇī–Aṭṭhasālinī 
Ps.A.  Commentary of the Pa ṭisambhidāmagga
D.Ṭ. iii 280 Subcommentary of the D īgha Nikāya-Pāthikavagga-aṭṭhakathā
Sad. ii   Saddan īti Dhātumālā by Aggavaṃsa
All references provided refer to the Sixth Buddhist Council Edition.
Abbreviations of References
145
 Karuna-Ahimsa-and Relational Aesthetics: 
Empathic  Art Interventions for Contemplative 
Approaches to Psychotherapy
Michael Franklin, Ph.D., ATR-BC
Professor, Transpersonal Counseling Psychology
Coordinator, Graduate Art Therapy Program 
and the Naropa Community Art Studio
Naropa University
Introduction
Compassion or Karuna, emerges out of empathic awareness for human suffering. Attuned 
communication of this awareness is perhaps the most effective tool available to the psychotherapist 
treating psychological injuries. Additionally, humanistic wisdom or Prajna naturally results from 
our compassionate sensitivity to the anguish of others. Therefore empathic perception along with 
compassionate understanding and action are primary tools for repairing relational/emotional wounding. 
Empathy, a noun, is about feeling into the world of others and gathering information about their 
internal life. In the adjective form, well-timed empathic responses take this attuned awareness further 
by directly communicating our perceptive caring. 
Behind all therapeutic interventions, including empathy, is the ethical value of ahimsa; to do 
no harm. Mistakes, which are to be expected in any relational process, happen. When they do, they are 
useful opportunities to create humanistic authenticity and further the therapeutic alliance by skillfully 
processing accompanying transference. A therapist can make an honest mistake without the intent 
to do harm, be perceived by the client as causing harm, and remain fully present with what emerges 
and process it through with the client. Simply stated, empathy is a tool for interpersonal access and 
action while ahimsa and compassion are the moral and ethical ground of universal interconnection.
Verbal consolidation of core emotional material is the usual method of communicating 
compassionate understanding within the therapeutic relationship. We receive the client’s painful or 
disjointed narrative, synthesize and reconsolidate its dimensional content, and paraphrase back our 
perceptive grasp of their inner life. We try to direct these comments towards the “emotional center” 
of the clients presenting problems (Sobol & Williams, 2001). Additionally, there are non-verbal ways 
to accomplish the same intention and with signiﬁ cant results (Franklin, 2010). This paper addresses 
the exchange process of relational aesthetics and the use of empathic art interventions to awaken 
the humanistic wisdom of prajna and the compassion of karuna within the therapeutic relationship. 
Becoming a Good Student of Oneself
Concerning the cultivation of wisdom and compassion, ﬁ rst it is important to become 
a good student of oneself in order to self examine the layered complexities of our personal blind-spots 
stimulated by encounters with our clients (Franklin, 1999). Multifaceted clinical material can be 
Introduction
Becoming a Good Student of Oneself
146
Conference
mindfully untangled through a post-session response art practice (Fish, 2008; Moon, 1999). In 
responsive art making, therapists intentionally create post-session paintings, sculptures, or videos 
to study their countertransference reactions. This art-based self-awareness practice, is less about 
analyzing and more about feeling into the ambiguity of actual clinical and autobiographical 
experience belonging to the client and the therapist. Using art this way exponentially accelerates 
the process of cultivating clinical insight. By surfacing and decoding unconscious material through 
art, we establish a methodology necessary for best practices in psychotherapy. We literally excavate 
hidden and obvious content, distill it in artworks, and explore the emerging narratives through 
the response art process. Once this imagery is ﬁ xed within the format of a painting, sculpture, or ﬁ lm, 
symbolically rich material becomes readily available for decoding interpersonally rich subject matter.
Additionally, the use of in-session art to directly communicate empathic understanding and 
ease suffering will be addressed (Franklin, 2010). Essentially, accurately crafted empathic visual 
paraphrases, in unison with verbal summaries of meta communications related to body-speech-mind 
material, soothe the emotional center of the clients presenting concerns. Wisdom and compassion 
resulting from response art and empathic art interventions lay important tracks for practicing 
the spiritual dimensions of contemplative art-psychotherapy.
Moreover, response art cultivates qualities of presence by raising awareness for 
the distracting triggers of countertransference. These triggers can be activated by various 
circumstances. For example the ambiguity of complicated case material, a lack of understanding 
for complex unfamiliar symptoms, or inadequate cultural awareness can leave the therapist feeling 
unsure about how to continue. And yet, we attempt to stay present with what emerges, check to see 
if we are practicing outside of our area of knowledge, and with supervision, proceed. 
Ambiguity is inevitable; how we respond to uncertainty is key. Under these circumstances, 
presence, which is our goal, refers to subtle qualities of accessibility, availability, and attendance. 
These intrinsically present yet outwardly understated traits are informed by the four divine states, 
or abodes. They are: loving kindness/ metta, compassion/ karuna, joy/ mudita, and equipoise /
upekkha. Also known as the four immeasurables, contemplatively oriented psychotherapists cultivate 
and internalize these awakened qualities of heart and mind. We strive to bring the loving kindness 
of ahimsa to our work, cultivate upekkha through practices like response art, and develop karuna 
through unconditional presence and empathic art responses.
The four immeasurables are also held as hopeful outcomes for our clients. We want our 
clients to discover their own version of personal happiness, to be free of their suffering, to rejoice in 
the happiness of others, and to see themselves and others with equanimity. With an attentive ear and 
eye, we listen and look for hints of each abode in their body, speech, mind, and artwork presentations. 
Since art concretizes experience, there is a tangible record of the emerging divine abode (s). Seeing 
is the start of believing. An artwork that is about internalized feelings of aggressive self-deprecation 
can surface and make tangible the rejected pain behind the anger.  The client can now see, touch, 
and hold their own self-aggression and begin to approach the work with gentleness for him/herself 
and the image. It is important to point out that tangible images have a life-like presence of their 
own. Each image, whether it comes from our dreams or our artwork, will beckon our attention. Such 
a moment of tenderly relating to a charged image can be the beginning of our clients discovering 
self-compassion, inner friendship, and the soft interior space of equipoise.
147
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Ahimsa, Empathy, and Relational Aesthetics
Ahimsa, a foundational tenet of spiritual practice (Feuerstein, 2003) and the core of relational 
aesthetics addressed in this paper, focuses on interconnection, non-violence in words and actions, 
and loving respect for all forms of life. It is an ethical value that is expressed daily in spiritual and 
aesthetic practices. 
Ahimsa is more about the principles of relational continuities than a singular ﬁ xed point 
of view. Similarly, art too emerges out of the continuities of daily life. In this sense art is less 
about perfected representational imagery and more about relational attunement to the entire 
phenomenological ﬁ eld of life. To open-mindedly see and respond to the myriad forms of the world, 
from the picturesque to the unpleasant, is to awaken to all versions of the visual ﬁ eld as systemic 
truth (Sewell, 1995). Similarly, ahimsa is the ethical core of the therapeutic alliance between patient 
and therapist. We attempt to see the entire person before us through a receptive lens of attunement 
(Schore & Schore, 2008). That is, to do no harm is at the heart of any healthcare profession, 
especially psychotherapy. 
Ahimsa, compassion, and empathy have long roots in the arts. Art, as a form of sublimation, 
supports the artistic forming of chaotic impulses and actions (Kramer, 1979, Knafos, 2002). It is 
better to create art about aggressive impulses than to act those impulses out and do tangible harm. 
Kramer suggests that society becomes more civilized when unchecked impulses are channeled into 
visual equivalents for base urges. Therefore, it would seem that artistic sublimation is one way to 
enhance the ethics of ahimsa and lessen damaging karmic exposure. Rather than perpetrate direct 
harm, the art communicates the transformation of these harmful impulses into symbolic counterparts 
for those energies (Kramer, 1979). 
However, it is important to acknowledge that even though overt aggressive behavior has 
been temporarily avoided, inﬂ uential negative thoughts can still exist. Nonetheless, “as the authors 
of our own destiny” we need help discovering judicious ways to handle our actions resulting from 
our personal freedoms (Shantideva, 1997, p.6). Towards this end, sublimation through art is a helpful 
tool. As a ﬁ nal point, society and the individual bene ﬁ t from this form of rechanneled molli ﬁ ed 
aggression. Since the replication of the original behavior has been artistically contained, rehearsed and 
rehearsed in additional artworks, extinction of the initial behavior becomes an eventual possibility.  
Concerning empathy and the arts, the goal of Greek theater was to present stories of suffering 
on stage so that the audience could awaken the faculty of inner empathy (Armstrong, 2010). Similarly, 
in rasa theory viewers practice accessing transcendent states through sympathetic receptivity to 
the gamut of human emotions (Schwartz, 2004). In the late 19th and early 20th century in Europe and 
the US, Robert Vischer, Theodore Lipps, Edward Tichener, and Vernon Lee were formulating ideas 
on art, sympathy, and empathy (Jahoda, 2005). According to Jahoda, each respectively researched 
how empathy is an instinctual, intersubjective, and imaginal practice of aesthetic einfuhlung, which 
at a sensory level means to feel into the world of another. From this perspective, a relational view 
of aesthetics becomes possible.
Ahimsa, Empathy, and Relational Aesthetics
148
Conference
Sentience and Relational Aesthetics
Psychotherapy and aesthetic attunement is predicated on relational and sensory 
responsiveness. This form of receptivity, or vicarious introspection pioneered by Kohut’s Self 
Psychology, is why empathy is curative (Elson, 1987). Accurately imagining and responding to 
the inner world of another while recognizing their brilliant sanity sets a powerful restorative process 
in motion (Wegela, 2010). Acknowledging basic goodness in unison with whatever our clients need 
to bring up afﬁ rms that they are accurately witnessed, heard, and validated.  But how can we cultivate 
this form of awareness? How can art help to train empathic seeing and connection? 
Attuned vicarious perception applied in psychotherapy is also related to aesthetic perception. 
In therapy, and in art, our practice is to see and respond to the interconnected world with 
compassionate awareness. Consequently, there is an aesthetic component to the therapeutic 
relationship in terms of our sensory awareness of human interconnection. Others have addressed 
the meaning of a relational aesthetic.
According to Nicolas Bourriaud (Ross, 2006), relational aesthetics views artwork through 
multiple lenses of concurrent interconnected relationships. Relational art removes the artist as expert 
and imbues creators and viewers with similar status. Likewise, a contemplative and humanistic view 
of psychotherapy attempts to remove the hierarchy between client and therapist. Art that emerges 
out of social interactions or therapy sessions, alive within the interstices of culture and communities, 
is at the heart this view of artistic work. 
This approach to art is in opposition to over prizing objects as commodities destined for 
museums and galleries. Within this perspective, the production and consumption of art departs from 
the archetypal view of the privileged public as the primary consumers of art as well as isolated 
artists working in the cloistered environment of the studio. Bishop (2004) suggests that scrutiny is 
needed to examine the curatorial processes that organize art shows claiming relational intentions as 
a primary goal in the selection process of artworks. In the context of this paper, relational aesthetics 
is not only considered from the perspective of Bourriaud and Bishop, but also from a therapeutic 
and transpersonal perspective. 
Art therapists have been interested in empathy and relational aesthetics since their work 
demands awareness of therapeutic and artistic processes with others (Franklin, 1990; Moon, 2001; 
Potash & Ho, 2011). For Moon the main criteria for art used in therapy is relational. She believes 
that art surfaces a web of connections that joins the artist, the art object, and the systemic environment 
including other people, together. More recently, Potash and Ho studied relational aesthetics as 
a framework for social change. Their study looked at the use of response art to facilitate changes in 
personal outlook concerning the stigma of mental illness. An art show comprised of work by people 
with mental illness was artistically responded to by a group of viewers. It was found that through the 
response art process, the group of viewers increased their empathy for this population accompanied 
by attitudinal changes concerning mental illness.   
The practice of ahimsa is a humanizing and therefore aesthetic force. Aesthetic perception in 
this case is not privileged taste, the consumption of fad trends, or saccharine beauty. To aesthetically 
perceive sentience is to feel deeply into the phenomenology of the physical world, which in turn 
inspires us to not harm any living thing. This form of aesthetic discernment results in egalitarian 
Sentience and Relational Aesthetics
149
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
vision, especially for the voiceless ﬂ ora and fauna unable to express self-advocacy. To truly see 
the full democracy of beauty is to follow with a vow of ahimsa.    
Empathic Exchange in Contemplative Psychotherapy and Art Therapy
People seek out psychotherapy for various reasons. Often is the case that some form of 
trauma, psychological and/or physical, was perpetrated against them. Assumed safe people, such 
as family members or community leaders, have harmed those who eventually become our clients 
in psychotherapy. Understanding the many forms of psychological trauma and how to successfully 
treat emotional pain through a skillful therapeutic relationship, grounded in the intention of ahimsa 
and the compassionate action of empathy, is foundational to contemplative psychotherapy work. 
Since psychological trauma is usually perpetrated in relationship, it needs to be healed within 
the context of a compassionately conceived therapeutic relationship. 
Known as exchange in contemplative psychotherapy, we practice as best we can mindful 
contact with our clients and ourselves, moment to moment, in each session (Wegela, 2010). Our overall 
goal in the exchange process is unconditional receptivity to interconnection as events spontaneously 
emerge. One way to support this kind of contact is by recognizing what is sane and healthy in our 
clients. In many ways, what is labeled pathological behavior is really survival strategy behavior 
and expressions of brilliant sanity. That is underneath all of the diagnostic labels and inappropriate 
behaviors, is a version of health and sanity that expresses itself with attempts to survive in insane 
conditions. As an introspective aside, I too would likely behave in similar ways if I were exposed 
to comparable traumatic circumstances. Therefore, it is incumbent upon the therapist to understand 
the client by monitoring impulses towards judgment and acknowledging what is brilliantly sane in 
them (Wegela, 2010). 
In the art studio, most all behavior is acceptable subject matter for creative exploration. 
Artistic sublimation, which is really an awareness practice, offers a concrete way to observe sanity 
and overall psychological impulses towards health. Through this view of art, we can observe people 
being productive with wide ranging impulses, thus demonstrating access to inner coping resources 
often thought to be nonexistent within a limiting, reductive diagnosis. We are all more than our 
symptoms. 
This view of art supports the idea that suffering can be externalized and modified. 
Additionally, sublimated client imagery becomes a gateway for our empathy. Seeing anguish 
expressed visually informs us how to recognize and respond to anguish. One way to develop this 
kind of responsiveness is through the body-speech-mind practice (Wegela, 2010). 
The body-speech-mind practice, which originates from classical Tibetan Buddhism (Wegela, 
2010), helps to clarify the obstacles that can thwart empathic exchange (Rabin & Walker, 1987). 
In terms of the body, we attune to all physical qualities of the clients embodied presentation. Speech 
refers to styles of dialogue, cadence, and the overall content of communication. And mind implies 
qualities of emotional intelligence, learning styles, and cognitive features such as memory and 
cognition. These sectors of the personality are carefully observed and then conscientiously described. 
Such descriptions yield accurate phenomenological information, ultimately avoiding reckless 
Empathic Exchange in Contemplative Psychotherapy and Art Therapy
150
Conference
interpretations of another human being. From these observational descriptions, behavioral content 
becomes revealed phenomena thus furthering the exchange process. 
The making of responsive art described earlier is similar to the body-speech-mind 
exercise used in contemplative psychotherapy. In fact, it is suggested that speci ﬁ c artworks be 
created to correspond with the client’s body-speech-mind presentation. Since art is a form of 
autobiographical communication layered with symbolic subtlety, it is imperative that the observer 
of the client, the client’s artwork, and the therapist’s response art, be met with the following process. 
Rigorous observation of body-speech-mind phenomena leads to accurate descriptions of this data. 
During this stage, personal projections are carefully monitored and withheld from overt expression. 
From mindful descriptions, insight and clarity associated with astute observation emerges 
(Coleman, 1981). In terms of art, judicious observations of the formal elements within the work 
expose insight into psychological content. Said another way, careful examination of the formal 
elements in a work of art leads to the unfolding of content or meaning. This responsible approach 
to the relational aesthetics of perceiving another person and their artwork minimizes interpretive 
license to mischaracterize our clients. 
In addition to responsible strategies for looking at artwork and human behavior, there are 
necessary skills needed for empathically entering into the world of another. In the Bodhicharyavatara, 
Shantideva (1996) addresses the practice of “exchanging self and other” through a process of 
“sympathetic imagination” (p. 187). This inspiring discourse offers several pathways to attune to 
the point of view of others thereby eroding the separations between therapist and client. The key is 
a skillful use of imagination in measure with clear observation. 
Imagination here implies a way to move beyond our own ﬁ xed point of view and perceive 
with a wide-open mind.  Beyond our own cultural view is a world of diversity that we are called 
upon to tenderly access and imagination is our point of entry. I know of no better way to train 
the empathic imagination than through art. Art is inherently a process of exchange since we are taking 
some aspect of experience in and responding back, through the use of materials, with a tangible 
image. Like tonglen practice, in art we mindfully take in qualities of experience and send back out 
an aesthetic response. In the context of art therapy, sessions can be about our clients externalizing 
their suffering through art, receiving back this personal anguish through the ﬁ nished product, and 
modifying the pain through further artworks. 
Imagination and empathy have been closely studied in the arts (Jahoda, 2005; Mallgrave & 
Ikonomou, 1994). For example Rudolf Arnheim (1966) focused on “sympathetic empathy,” which 
is deﬁ ned as a form of resonance with isomorphic similarities between line, shape, and color and 
inner experience (p. 66). These corresponding similarities between form (line and shape) and content 
(emotion and narrative) are accessed and understood through imagination. Theodore Lipps considered 
how contemplated artworks penetrate the observer by literally transporting the viewer into an image 
(Johoda, 2005). The transfer process of emotional projection, which is related to imaginal and aesthetic 
einfuhlung, means to feel within or even into something outside ones’ self. 
Additionally, artistic practices can be used as a form of self-supervision aimed at 
the empathic exchange with self with other (Franklin, 1999). In these exercises, which speciﬁ cally 
focus on challenging clients, a complex three-dimensional version of the therapeutic relationship 
151
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
is created. With ample time, these recreations can reach life size proportions. The goal is to surface 
compassion for our relational blind spots through a process of aesthetic exchange. After 15 years of 
conducting these workshops, people consistently report heart opening results.    
Karuna, Prajna, and Empathic Art
Empathic art becomes a necessary tool for communicating compassionate 
attunement (Franklin, 1990, 2010). This form of art is deﬁ ned as carefully feeling into and sensing 
the isomorphic gestalts in another person’s overall presentation including their artwork. The process 
then turns to mindful ﬁ ltration of this information through personal resonance with affective cues 
from the art and presenting body-speech-mind states. Finally, this data is used to craft visual 
narratives that attune to the clients emotional center. 
 Empathic art interventions offer a critical set of strategies for directly conveying altruistic 
awareness for the clients autobiographical past and unclear present. These paraphrased visual state-
ments sort out and consolidate wide ranging emotional material. Confused misperceptions emerging 
from a chaotic inner self-structure can be clariﬁ ed through this form of artistic exchange. 
Eventually, clients improve their capacity for insight when presented with empathic art. 
They begin to see themselves differently by adopting a personal view of self-empathy. A natural 
shift occurs whereby the therapist’s empathic communications are needed less as they are replaced 
by self-initiated attempts to do the same. Clients learn to empathize with their own suffering by 
surrendering the need to reject it, thus releasing forms of internalized oppression (Germer, Siegel, & 
Fulton, 2005). Finally “insight”, “mindfulness”, “discretion”, and “conﬁ dence” become cultivated 
inner resources to call upon and apply daily (Goleman, 1975, p. 178). 
A Case Example
Years ago I worked with a 12-year-old African-American boy, Peter, in a school setting 
for troubled youth (Franklin, 1990). Peter had a turbulent life, and by the time I saw him his father 
had abandoned his small family and his mother was deemed unﬁ t. As well, countless professionals 
charged with his care, in various ways, had also neglected him. For example, at one point he was 
removed from his home and placed in a group home. This new placement was supposed to offer 
a safe therapeutic environment. It did not. Late at night the older boys would ban together and 
terrorize the younger children, including Peter. In order to protect himself, he would stay awake all night 
in case he was attacked. At ﬁ rst, I had no idea he was living under such oppressive circumstances. 
The school employees, including the psychologist, thought he was living in a secure setting. 
When I saw him at 8am for private art therapy sessions he would rest his head between 
his arms, on the table, and go to sleep. Although at ﬁ rst I did not understand his need for sleep, 
and since this was our contracted time, I allowed him to nap. While sleeping, I drew him. When he 
awoke, he looked at my drawing and immediately said with a big smile, that’s Me! This went on for 
a short while until we realized why he was so tired. These empathic art responses helped him to ﬁ nd 
the words needed to communicate to the school staff his unfortunate situation in the group home. 
A Case Example
Karuna, Prajna, and Empathic Art
152
Conference
The pictures that I drew of Peter non-verbally conveyed several points. First, when in therapy, 
he would not be abandoned. This was important because he also had issues with me as white man. 
For months, during the initial stages of our work together, he made numerous uncensored angry 
comments about white men. I patiently received these transferences, listening to his point of view 
while we made art together. He was able to be angry with me while also enrolling me as an ally to 
help him with his many art projects. 
Second, while sleeping, he was safe. No one was going to harm him while he was in my 
care. Third, I was remaining in contact with him, non-verbally, while he was in the vulnerable 
position of sleep in a public place with a person he had not trusted in the past. Fourth, someone was 
listening even if at ﬁ rst I did not fully grasp his situation. This form of artistic witnessing and artistic 
exchange provided me with a strategy for compassionate presence by directly communicating my 
understanding of the many layers of Peter’s psychological abandonment. Each drawing acknowledged 
that he was safe, seen, and validated.  Like a triple jump in checkers, this intervention exponentially 
progressed our therapy work together for the remainder of the school year.
These drawing also acknowledged and directly responded to his body-speech-mind 
communication. His body was tired, his speech was predominantly silent until he woke up, and 
his young mind was processing layers of abandonment. This all happened in session which was 
important for our ever-evolving complex relationship. 
Psychotherapy offers a relationship unlike any other. In this case, Peter was seemingly 
beneﬁ ting from expressing strong transference while I patiently received it in our weekly sessions. 
Most important was that one drawing could directly communicate layers of his felt, but unseen 
body-speech-mind presentation as well as my reliability to no abandon him.  
Conclusion
Compassion in psychotherapy is predicated on participating with the clients suffering without 
over identifying with their circumstances. Mindfulness training is helpful to comb through these 
feeling states and manage personal triggers. Meditation also helps to clear the intersubjective ﬁ eld 
of distracting debris that can inﬂ uence our objectivity. This is accomplished through the cultivation 
of non-reactivity, perceptual and sensory attention, acting with awareness, observational witnessing, 
and not judging personal experiences (Baer, Smith, Hopkins, Krietemeyer, & Toney, 2006). 
Lastly, the interventions discussed in this article address compassionate ways to remain 
present during the exchange process. The skill-sets necessary for being of service to others in 
the midst of their distress are exponentially aided by non-verbal empathic art interventions. In essence, 
the preventative and prescriptive measures of artistic empathy are like a psychotherapeutic dharma 
art practice (Trungpa, 1996). Trungpa felt that genuine art, which emerges from the clarity of 
practice, can awaken, even liberate the viewer and the artist. Empathic art is a form of dharma art. 
Both strive to directly respond with an attitude of ahimsa and to serve others with clarity of vision 
to connect and awaken.
Conclusion
153
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
References
Armstrong, K. (2010). Twelve steps to a compassionate life. New York: Alfred A. Knope.
Arnheim, R. (1966). Toward a psychology of art: Collected essays. Berkley: University of California 
Press.
Baer, R. A., Smith, G. T., Hopkins, J., Krietemeyer, J., & Toney, L. (2006). Using self-report assessment 
methods to explore facets of mindfulness. Assessment, 13, 27–45.
Bishop, C. (2004). Antagonism and relational aesthetics. October Magazine, 110, 51-79.
Elson, M. (1987). The Kohut seminars on self-psychology with adolescents and young adults. New York: 
Norton. 
Feuerstein, G. (2003). The deeper dimensions of yoga: Theory and practice. Boston: Shambhala 
Press.
Fish, B. J. (2008). Formative evaluation research of art-based supervision in art therapy training. 
Art Therapy: Journal of the American Art Therapy Association, 25(2), 70-77.
Franklin, M (2010). Affect regulation, mirror neurons and the 3rd hand: Formulating mindful empathic 
art interventions. Art Therapy: The journal of the American Art Therapy Association.
27(4), 160-167.
Franklin, M. (1990). The esthetic attitude and empathy: A point of convergence. The American 
Journal of Art Therapy, 29(2), 42-47.
Franklin, M. (1999). Becoming a student of oneself: Activating the Witness in meditation, art, and 
super-vision. The American Journal of Art Therapy, 38(1), 2-13.
Germer, G. K, Siegel, R. D., & Fulton, R. F. (2005). Mindfulness and psychotherapy. New York, 
NY: Guilford Press.
Goleman, D. (1975). Mental health in classical Buddhist psychology. The Journal of Transpersonal 
Psychology, 7(2), 176-181.
Goleman, D. (1981). Buddhist and western psychology: Some commonalities and differences. 
The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 13(2), 125-136.
Jahoda, G. (2005). Theodore Lipps and the shift from “sympathy” to “empathy.” Journal of 
the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 41(2), 151–163.
Knafo, D. (2002). Revisiting Ernst Kris’s concept of regression in the service of the ego in art. 
Psychoanalytic Psychology, 19, (1), 24-49.
Kramer, E. (1979). Childhood and art therapy. New York, NY: Schocken Books. 
Mallgrave, H. F., & Ikonomou, E. (Eds.). (1994). Empathy, form, and space. Santa Monica, CA: 
The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities. 
References
154
Conference
Moon, B. L. (1999). The tears make me paint: The role of responsive artmaking in adolescent art 
therapy. Art Therapy: The Journal of the American Art Therapy Association, 16(3), 78-82.
Moon, C. H. (2002). Studio art therapy: Cultivating the artist identity in the art therapist. London: 
Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Potash, J., & Ho, R. T. H. (2011). Drawing involves caring: Fostering relationship building through 
art therapy for social change. Art Therapy: The journal of the American Art Therapy 
Association. 28(2), 74-81.
Rabin, B. and Walker, R. (1987). A contemplative approach to clinical supervision. Journal of 
Contemplative Psychotherapy, 4, 135-149.
Ross, T. (2006). Aesthetic autonomy and interdisciplinarity: A response to Nicolas Bourriaud’s 
‘relational aesthetics’. Journal of Visual Art Practice, 5(3). 167-181.
Schore, J. R., & Schore, A. N. (2008). Modern attachment theory: The central role of affect regulation 
in development and treatment. Clinical Social Work, 36, 9–20.
Schwartz, S. L. (2004). Rasa: Performing the divine in India. New York, NY: Columbia University 
Press.
Sewall, L. (1995). The skill of ecological perception. In T. Roszak, M. E. Gomes, & A. D. Kanner 
(Eds.), Ecopsychology: Restoring the earth, healing the mind (pp. 201-215). Berkeley, CA: 
Sierra Club Books. 
Shantideva (1997). The way of the Bodhisattva: The Padmakara translation group. Boston, Shambhala 
Press. 
Sobol, B., & Williams, K. (2001). Family and group art therapy. In J. A. Rubin (Ed.), Approaches 
to art therapy (pp. 261-280). Philadelphia: Brunner-Routledge. 
Trungpa, C. (1996). Dharma art. Boston, MA: Shambhala.
Wegela, K. K. (2010). The courage to be present: Buddhism, psychotherapy, and the awakening of 
natural wisdom. Boston: Shambhala Press.
155
Cultivating Wisdom and Compassion in Relationships: 
Implications for Couples Therapy
Heather Marriott
Brad and Sally sat down on my couch. She was crying before I could even ask them why 
they were here. From his body language, I could see Brad was seething. This young couple had been 
seeing each other for a few years but she was very clingy and anxious in the relationship. Sally was 
sure he was seeing other women and couldn’t understand how he could be attracted to her. She felt 
she was too overweight and not beautiful enough for him. Brad worked hard in his own business 
and when he arrived home at night he would be withdrawn towards Sally and hostile towards her 
attempts to get close to him. He had a low libido and would often reject her initiation of physical 
intimacy. Both of them were miserable, and, although they said they loved each other deeply, they 
didn’t know how to improve things.
How can this lovely couple be helped to develop their relationship into one that is mature 
and embraces the qualities of wisdom and compassion? What can we learn from Buddhism and 
the Western psychotherapy traditions that can support them to grow beyond the emotional issues 
that are holding them back?
What Is Wisdom And Compassion?
In Mahayana Buddhism, wisdom manifests as a deep understanding of our inherent nature. 
It is a recognition of our own suffering and what it means to be truly human. Through that realization 
we can then learn to understand the suffering of others, and compassion will spontaneously arise. 
The practice of meditation allows us to know “which states of mind, emotions, thoughts and attitudes 
are beneﬁ cial and which are harmful to ourselves and others, and also how these states in ﬂ uence 
our interactions with other people and the way we live our lives.” (Traleg Kyabgon, 2001, p.23) 
As we appreciate our true nature we gain a sense of common humanity; that we’re all in 
this existential mire together. Understanding that “you” suffer as “I” suffer increases compassion 
towards the other person, and in understanding that “I” suffer as “you” suffer there is increased 
compassion towards the self. In recognizing that we are interconnected we cultivate empathy and 
altruism; yet in a way that is not sti ﬂ ing of the other, or compromising of ourselves. It is a light 
recognition and nod to each other, along with a concern that enhances the autonomy of both. This 
concept of common humanity is an essential component of self-compassion that has been identiﬁ ed 
by Kristin Neff (2011) in her research.
Glaser (2005) de ﬁ nes compassion as “…the basis of connection, intimacy, openness, 
kindness, hospitality, and joy. It is an expression of human freedom, ﬂ owing from a sound intuition 
of the unity of life and all living things.” (p. 11). She differentiates between the compassion one has 
for the other which emerges from genuine love and regard, from the love associated with attachment. 

156
Conference
Compassion in intimate relationships “…is more than simply caring for the partner; it is 
a love founded on an accurate understanding of the partner. Compassionate love is personally fulﬁ lling, 
in that spouses can reap the rewards of their love; but it is also selﬂ ess, in that spouses accept their 
partners –  the good and the bad, for who they are.” (Neff and Karney, 2009). So the old scripts that 
are played out through either idealizing or denigrating the partner are revealed; and true acceptance 
for oneself and the other forms the foundation of this more mature love. 
ATTACHMENTS AND PROJECTIONS
To help Brad and Sally we must enable them to begin to see the workings of their minds. 
We can help them to understand their thoughts and their emotions. In particular, we need them to 
be able to observe how they project underlying issues onto their partners.
According to Buddhism, we can be blindsided by our perceptions in how we relate with 
the world generally, and in our relationships, speci ﬁ cally. Our perceptions about ourselves, our 
expectations and our assumptions are projected onto the external world, which we must then relate 
to. One of the reasons that we practice meditation is to be able to see through these projections, 
and to relate to the world with genuineness. To know our own minds clearly; rather than distorting 
the external world to ﬁ t into our own view of how things are.
In Buddhism, our projections towards others tend to take the form of attraction or aversion, 
which bring up the corresponding emotions of passion or aggression. We like certain things and 
dislike others, and we are constantly shifting in our preferences. It is possible that we can have 
the strong reactions of both aggression and aversion towards the same person at different times in 
the same day. These emotional reactions are a reﬂ ection of what is happening in our own minds. 
We tend to create a story or a scenario around these shifts in our attraction or aversion 
which then inﬂ uences how we feel about the other, about ourselves, and how we communicate and 
behave within the relationship. From a Buddhist perspective it is these attachments that we have 
towards the external world that are a cause of our suffering. It follows that any relationship will be 
fraught unless we are able to develop the appropriate view and ways of dealing with phenomena, 
both external and internal, as they appear.
Compassion can arise when we are able to see this play of the mind. We can see reality for 
what it is –  to see that in effect, we create our own world and then relate to it. Trungpa points out 
that when we can loosen our solid and ﬁ xed view of ourselves, others, and the world, then we can 
begin to realize compassion. He says: “Compassion sees the nature of the samsaric game that is 
being played… ” (Trungpa 2011, p 132).
Attachment theory and attunement
From a Western view, psychological projections are discussed from the perspective of 
attachment theory. Our earliest childhood relationships set up emotional and behavioral habits that 
can affect the way we manage our intimate interactions for the rest of our lives. If we are insecurely 
AT TACHMENTS AND PROJECTIONS
157
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
attached this might lead to anxious behaviors of becoming clingy, demanding and overly dependent. 
Alternatively, we may be avoidant and ambivalent which leads to aloofness and withdrawal (Bowlby, 
cited Snyder et al, 2011). 
Our early attachments inﬂ uence the development of neural pathways in the brain. When we 
have secure relationships with our primary caregiver, then we have a stronger connection between 
the emotional parts of the brain (the amygdala and the limbic system) and the prefrontal cortex, 
which is able to mediate emotions. If we have insecure attachments, then as adults, we will have 
more trouble regulating our emotions (Lapides, 2010). 
The right hemisphere of the brain processes empathy and attachment. When the right 
hemispheres of mother and child mutually connect, this forms the basis of empathy. This capacity 
for attunement in ﬂ uences our adult relationships. Evidence shows that humans have a mirror 
neuron system that is implicated in the cultivation of attunement and empathy. When one individual 
views the actions of another their mirror neurons are activated. This allows the person to have 
an understanding of the behavior and emotional perspective of the other and ultimately to be able 
to develop empathy. (Gallese, 2001). According to Siegel (2009), neural integration and subsequent 
attunement can be propagated by mindfulness practice, a healthy adult relationship or a good 
psychotherapeutic alliance. 
The human desire to attach to another forms the basis for our adult relationships. If we are 
attracted to someone, we may fall under the spell of romantic love. This is a state of physiological 
arousal known as limerence (Tennov, 1979; cited Diamond, 2004), and it is at this point we tend to 
project our idealized image onto the other person. It is a comforting experience whereby we have 
the notion that: “This person is a reﬂ ection of me, there is no difference between us. This feels safe, 
as if we have ﬁ nally come home; the world makes sense and we can live happily ever after”. 
Often this feeling towards the other is based on our old attachment issues. People seem 
to have what I call the “neurotic hook”, whereby they unconsciously come together and form 
a co-dependency with the other. This can lead to a heightened sense of arousal based on deluded 
notions of the other, rather than on genuine love. 
When we are stuck in our projections, we tend to objectify the other person. They become 
an idealized or negative version of our own mind, and the relationship becomes a reﬂ ection of that. 
As the projections are resolved, one is able to see the other person for who they really are; then 
empathy and compassion can arise. Martin Buber says that “Only (persons) who are capable of truly 
saying Thou to one another can truly say We with one another.” (1965a pp 39-40 cited Fishbane, 
1998). We see the other as a human being and then we can create a sense of real togetherness. 
We can see Brad and Sally both had attachment issues from their childhood. Brad’ s mother 
had a substance abuse problem and she did not offer Brad any affection or stability in his life. 
He recalls that his mother would lie on the couch a lot, stoned, and he would feel trapped in the home 
often taking care of her needs while his were neglected. She was emotionally very demanding of Brad 
and he felt rejected. His attachment style was one of withdrawal. He was terri ﬁ ed of intimacy and 
would ignore Sally, but at the same time he was highly anxious that Sally would stop loving him and 
would leave him. His fear of intimacy and loss was such that he even suppressed his sexual desires. 
158
Conference
When Sally was eight, her mother and father separated under the same roof. Her mother 
would often stay out late at night and on the weekends. Sally recalls feeling very anxious about this 
and would wait long hours by the window until she returned. She also experienced a great tragedy 
in early adulthood when her boyfriend was accidentally killed at work. This contributed to her 
anxieties and manifested in being overly demanding and immature in her relationship with Brad. 
The attachment styles of each partner hooked into each other and continually reinforced 
the problems in their relationship. The more demanding Sally became because of her own insecuri-
ties, the more angry and withdrawn Brad would become. And the more he withdrew from Sally, the 
more anxious she would become. 
MINDFULNESS TRAINING
So in Brad and Sally’s case we could begin by instructing them in mindfulness and 
loving-kindness techniques. This they could do on their own and some practices could be useful for 
them to undertake together. 
We can approach mindfulness training from the perspective of what I call the Four “Is” of 
Mindfulness. 
1. Intentionality
It is important in our mindfulness practice to have a clear intention of what we are trying 
to achieve. One of the limitations of the mindfulness movement is that it has been taken out of 
the overall context and view of Buddhist theory. Mindfulness is part of the Noble Eightfold Path 
and therefore forms part of our overall lifestyle, ethics and values. Right mindfulness is prefaced by 
right view and right intention. Unless we have an unambiguous intention, our mindfulness practice 
will not lead to personal transformation. According to Ajahn Brahm (2006):“Only when one has … 
a clear goal will there be the possibility of spiritual progress”(p 258).
Research has shown that when we set our intention at the beginning of our practice, this will 
produce outcomes consistent with our goals (Shapiro and Carlson, 1992, cited Shapiro and Carlson, 
2009). In our mindfulness practice we can establish the aspiration to learn to work directly with our 
emotions in order to be able to relate to others in a in a mature, empathic and compassionate way. 
2. Intrapersonal
Mindfulness practice can help us to learn to regulate our emotions. We can become more 
aware of the physical manifestation of different feelings and able to recognise the emotions associated 
with those sensations. We then become more willing and effective in accepting and tolerating our 
feelings and emotions (Hayes and Feldman, 2004, Brown et al, 2007). This means that when we have 
a reaction to our partner, or to a relationship issue, we will be able to take responsibility for our 
emotions rather than looking to blame the other. We are able to take care of ourselves in a mature way.
MINDFULNESS TRAINING
159
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Through mindfulness one is able to observe how the causes and conditions arise that 
inﬂ uence how we think, feel and act. When we can see that our thoughts and emotions are, in 
essence, without substantiality, we can learn to befriend them and not be compelled to act out of 
those transient states. When we can recognise the origins of the assumptions that we hold about 
ourselves and about the other person, we don’t have to act on those assumptions in the same way. 
For example, if we have a belief about ourselves as unlovable and our partner looks at us in a way 
that seems dismissive, we might either get angry at that person or be overly critical of ourselves, 
or both. But when we realize we might be reading too much into that look, we don’t have to react 
in the same way.
From a Western perspective, difﬁ cult emotions have been seen as something unwanted; to be 
controlled or eliminated. However, by rejecting emotions we actually make them stronger and more 
resistant. When we have the view that an emotion is bad and unwanted, we are in effect rejecting 
a part of ourselves. It is true that when we can accept and embrace our negative emotions, they will 
spontaneously self-liberate. 
We can set the intention at the intrapersonal level of being aware of the rising and dissipating 
of negative and positive thoughts and emotions. It seems to be a function of the Western mind that 
we focus on unhelpful thoughts and emotions, and we can cling onto them and create a whole story 
that can last for a week. Conversely, when it comes to positive thoughts and emotions, we have 
a tendency to dismiss them. It is possible that we can beneﬁ t from being able to look at the negative 
thoughts and emotions and let them go, and to actually focus on the positive ones – “to burn them 
into our brains.” (Traleg Rinpoche, personal communication).
The extent to which we focus on negative or positive aspects seems to be linked to 
the early messages we introjected during childhood. If we have internalised critical self-talk, we 
will be inclined to continue with that script into adulthood (Ryan and Brown 2003). Research 
shows that mindfulness practice can be an antidote to self-criticism and allow for the cultivation of 
self-compassion (Germer, 2009; Neff, 2011). Self-compassion is strongly associated with psychological 
well-being and individuals with high self-compassion show increased happiness, optimism, and 
personal initiative, and are more connected with others. They also show higher levels of emotional 
intelligence, less anxiety, depression, neurotic perfectionism and rumination (Neff 2009).
Mindfulness allows us to see through our projections. As we become more mindful we can 
become aware of how these projections arise. Chogyam Trungpa (1975) talks about the possibility of 
becoming aware of even small ﬂ uctuations in our attention between these states, these “ﬂ ickerings” 
(page 57) of thoughts and emotions.
3. Interpersonal
So as we start to take responsibility for our own thoughts, emotions and behaviors we begin 
to truly have compassion for ourselves and others. We develop a sense of conﬁ dence and no longer 
need to take a defensive stance or to attribute blame. Because we are not as fearful, we can open up 
to a more direct communication with others. 
160
Conference
As we become more self-compassionate, our relationships with others will 
markedly improve. Research has shown that people with higher levels of self-compassion are more 
satisﬁ ed and happy with their romantic relationships (Neff, 2011). They are more accepting and 
non-judgmental of themselves and their partner. They are also able to be more affectionate, intimate 
and caring and to allow their partner more autonomy in the relationship. People with lower levels 
of self-compassion are more critical of themselves, less affectionate and more controlling (Baker 
and McNulty 2011).
Consequently, as we are able to deepen our understanding of our own thoughts and 
emotions as they arise, this mindfulness allows us to tolerate, accept and become more empathic. 
We become empathic in the sense of being able to take the perspective of the other person as well as 
being able to have empathic concern for them (Block-Lerner et al, 2007). Mindful individuals also 
can become more vulnerable with each other, repair conﬂ ict easily and be more intimate (Mirghain 
and Cordova 2007). This can be a result of being able to regulate any difﬁ cult emotions that might 
arise for them in the relationship. 
Overall, mindfulness practice can increase relationship skills and marital satisfaction. 
(Burpee and Langer, 2005). People with higher levels of mindfulness show less relationship stress, 
higher levels of satisfaction and generally more positive emotions about the relationship and their 
partner. (Barnes et al 2007, Gambrel and Keeling, 2010). Siegel (2007) introduces the acronym 
COAL – curiosity, openness, acceptance and love – for the attitude that develops with mindfulness 
practice. 
Mindfulness can help us to know when there are ruptures in the relationship that need to be 
repaired (Siegel 2007). According to Gottman and Silver (1999), successful relationships are not 
without conﬂ ict, but when con ﬂ ict arises the couple are quick at making reparation. The practice 
of mindfulness also contributes to healthy relationships because it allows the individual to slow 
their emotional reactions down and to respond to their partner in a more deliberate and useful way. 
Mindfulness allows for an increased space for the individual to decide how to respond 
(Snyder et al, 2011).
The mindfulness movement has been proven to be revolutionary in individual 
psychotherapy. Now this paradigm shift is embracing how we can work more effectively with couples. 
A program for couples has been developed (MBRE mindfulness-based relationship enhancement) 
comprising of an eight-week program which includes mindfulness and loving-kindness practices. 
In this course, loving-kindness meditations emphasized focusing on each partner as the main ob-
ject for their compassion. Overall results showed that individual participants were more relaxed 
and optimistic. The couple dyads also exhibited less relationship stress, and this correlated with 
the amount of mindfulness practice done on any given day. (Carson, Carson, Gil and Baucom 2006, 
Carson et al 2004). 
Later research demonstrated that mindfulness was effective in increasing self-compassion 
and empathy (Birnie, Speca and Carlson, 2010) and that loving-kindness meditation can lead to 
an increase in compassion towards self and compassionate love for others (Wiebel, 2007).  
Overall we ﬁ nd:
161
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Unmindful couples:
• Engage in harmful patterns of behavior.
• Withdraw emotionally.
• Express anger, frustration, violence.
• Show a lack of intimacy.
• Cannot resolve con ﬂ ict.
• Engage in behaviors as an unmindful attempt to gain power, or even to keep the rela-
tionship together.
Mindful couples are:
• More loving and thoughtful.
• Less likely to act out of entrenched and negative patterns of behaving – try a new way.
• Able to resolve con ﬂ ict.
• Able to move from blame to empathy.
• Mutually empowered. 
They also:
• Allow themselves to be vulnerable and therefore have increased intimacy.
• Embrace self-responsibility.
Fruzetti and Iverson (2005) also talk about how this mindfulness can be applied to relationships 
in four steps:
1. Individual mindfulness: Both individuals are mindful that current attempts to solve 
the problem are not working.
2. Behavioral tolerance: The couples then attempt to tolerate the other’s behavior rather 
than trying to change it.
3. Radical awareness: They are aware of the current dynamic and able to communicate 
about it.
4. True (radical) acceptance: occurs by transforming the con ﬂ ict into intimacy through 
acceptance of the patterns and motivations of the other, and enhanced understanding 
and closeness.
When working with couples I suggest they take on certain practices that will help us with 
our work together. These include:
• Practicing individual mindfulness meditation and loving-kindness practices on a regular 
basis. 
• Practicing mindfulness meditation at the same time as their partner: “the couple that are 
still together, are still together.”
162
Conference
• Doing loving-kindness practices as a couple, doing sending and receiving practice.
• Re ﬂ ective listening practices
4. Insight
The practice of  mindfulness helps to develop insight into the nature of our own minds and 
how we experience the world. We can begin to truly understand how our thoughts and emotions 
arise and dissipate and to be able to regulate our internal experiences. Siegel (2010) refers to this 
as “mindsight”. 
In addition, through clearly seeing how we relate to the phenomenal world we develop 
a deeper wisdom and a clarity of those around us. And through the practice of loving-kindness 
we can become increasingly mindful and compassionate to the suffering of others, which in turn 
increases our wisdom.
So Brad and Sally could enhance their relationship and develop empathy between them by 
practicing loving kindness. This could become a part of their ongoing commitment to each other. 
They can set time aside on a regular basis to sit opposite each other and send kind thoughts, love 
and light to the other. 
COUPLES IN THERAPY
Creating a mindful and accepting therapeutic alliance 
The basic frame of all therapy is to be able to create an atmosphere of awareness, acceptance 
and change and it is the mindful presence of the therapist that facilitates that process. We now know 
that techniques are important but account for only 15 per cent of change and that an optimal therapeutic 
relationship is one of the main factors contributing to change in therapy. (Hubble et al, 1999). This 
is true for individual and couples therapy.
To be present and mindful
The most important aspect of working with couples is to be as present and accepting as 
possible to both members of the dyad. This leads to a heightened awareness of how the couple are 
relating in the room in the here and now. We are noticing the content of what the couple reveals 
and the process of their interrelationship. The content is what happens between them –their beliefs, 
values, how they communicate, how they feel, how they act. The process is about the dynamic; what 
is underneath that which is being displayed. 
It is crucial for effective therapy that the therapist has her own mindfulness practice. 
Studies have shown that therapists who are regular meditators display higher levels of empathy than 
non-meditating therapists (Wang, 2006; Block-Lerner et al, 2007). In fact, clients of therapists with 
a mindfulness practice report being more satisﬁ ed with the therapy than the clients of therapists who 
do not practice mindfulness. (Grepmair et al, 2007; Baer, 2003).
COUPLES IN THERAPY
163
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Being as present as possible, the therapist can observe the dynamic as it is unfolding and 
to notice even small signs of emotions that each individual may be experiencing. When working 
with couples, being mindful allows us to notice any subtle shifts in mood, tension and non-verbal 
communication that the couple might exhibit. The therapist, through mindfulness, has developed 
the capacity for acute attunement (Bruce et al, 2010).
It is also important when working with couples not to be afraid of the emotions as they 
arise. The effective therapist is able to sit with the ambiguity of what might develop in the session 
and to try not to solve things immediately. I ﬁ nd my own meditation practice helps me to sit with 
uncertainty. In addition, being mindful helps me to be aware of my own emotions and to not let 
them inﬂ uence what is happening between the couple. For example, if there is anger or aggression 
in the room, this can feel quite threatening and bring up my own fear, and it’s important to be aware 
of that and not let fear overwhelm me. 
As a therapist, it’s useful to be aware of my own emotions because it can facilitate 
an understanding of how each partner might feel in relation to each other. In this way I am using 
the countertransference; any reaction that I am having is useful information to reﬂ ect back to the partners.  
There might also be more traditional countertransference going on. For example, is there anything 
in this dynamic that reminds me of my parents’ relationship or my own past intimate relationships? 
It’s important to control for this so that I am not contaminating the process between the couple.
Chogyam Trungpa (2005) talks about the necessity of the therapist being able to have 
a mindfulness practice. He says that one must “…study and experience one’s own mind. Then one 
can study and experience accurately the mind in the interpersonal situation.” Gehart and McCollum 
(2007) reiterate how mindful presence allows the therapist to be less reactive to the emotional 
ups and downs in therapy and “the therapist welcomes whatever is brought into the process with 
compassion and openness.” (p 220)
According to Cooper (2008) the therapist’s mindfulness is important in therapy in a few ways:
1. Being able to embrace one’s own suffering (face own anxiety) so that we can be 
compassionate and skillful with our clients. Suffering and resistance to suffering impacts 
on the attentiveness of the therapist.
2. Capacity of attention is related to how aware we can be in a given moment. Being able 
to distinguish between our own and the other’s issues.
3. Our ability to attend in the present moment requires an attitudinal shift related to 
acceptance. Not trying to change what is happening in the present.
So this is also true of couples therapy in the formation of an effective therapeutic alliance. 
The couple therapist must form an alliance with each individual partner as well as the “in between” 
(Rait, 2000) of the relationship. As I empathize with one partner, I must skillfully ensure I am not 
alienating the other. This can, of course, be tricky at times. Also, I must ensure that I am working 
for the beneﬁ t of the relationship. This can mean that I can call each partner to task, a bit of tough 
love, if it is for the bene ﬁ t of the health of the relationship. Therapist acceptance of the individual 
can foster non-defensiveness and change by:
164
Conference
• Bringing awareness of the couple dynamic into the therapy as it occurs in the here-and-now. 
Bring them back to the room, to their breath.
• Notice when they are drifting off or disengaging with the process.
• Therapist reports what is evoked, their own experience of sitting with the couple. 
• Talk more about what is happening ‘right here’ rather than ‘out there’.
• Therapist must be aware of own responses to the couple – e.g. biases, likes, dislikes etc.
THE THERAPEUTIC SPACE
A skillful therapeutic relationship allows for the establishment of a workable, creative and 
expansive space in which to work. This effective therapeutic realm has been labeled as “sacred space” 
by Siegelman (1990), by Winnicott as “potential space” (cited Siegelman, 1990). What happens 
in therapy is a microcosm of what happens in the world and vice versa. It is the “lived space” of 
the individual or couple reﬂ ected in the therapeutic relationship that enables the therapist to participate 
in the client’s world (Fuchs, 2007).
Ogden (1986) and Gabbard (1996) (both cited in Safran and Muran 2000) assert that 
the therapist can be absorbed into the client’s world while maintaining the capacity to observe 
the self and the other. The therapist is as aware of himself as he is of the client. He is also aware of 
what is happening between them. There is an awareness of proximity to and distance from the client. 
The therapist moves between her own subjective experiences and the objective tuning in with 
the client. (Siegelman, 1990) As the therapist is able to be fully present this capacity for “…mindfulness 
dissolves the artiﬁ cial boundaries that deﬁ ne our separateness.” (Fulton, 2005). 
The therapist must be mindful of their own internal process, their own thoughts, projections 
and emotions. The therapist is, effectively, able to get out of his/her own way. This increases 
the “internal space” of the therapist by decreasing the attachment to one’s own thoughts and emotions 
(Safran and Reading, 2008) and creates the space for other things to emerge such as feelings and 
deeper aspects of the client.
I allow this space to develop by not stepping in too soon, by breathing, and actually imagining 
that my mind is expanding. Because I am not motivated by my own anxiety and by being comfortable 
in silence I take up less space so the clients can ﬁ nd their own place in the room.
When working with couples, this therapeutic space expands to incorporate the three people in 
the room. As the therapist works to keep the couple in the moment, by focusing on feelings, thoughts 
and behaviors as they occur in the immediate time and space, there can be a sense of time standing 
still. It is an emotional space, one that I can only describe as being full of wisdom and compassion. 
It is in this space that the couple can transform the existing habitual dynamic to access a sense of 
love, acceptance and positive regard for one another. It is an extraordinary experience and one 
I feel very privileged to be a part of. At this time all three of us have our hearts open and are able to 
attune to one another. Potentially, this positive experience can undo negativities from the past and 
facilitate the re-wiring of the neural pathways.
THE THERAPEUTIC SPACE
165
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Surrey (2005) calls this process an opening up into the spiritual dimension. It is 
“…the practice of opening wholeheartedly to the present reality - of themselves, of each other, and 
of their connection -  an expanded receptivity that goes beyond the particularity of this relationship, 
or this setting.” (p. 97)
I think it is in this moment that wisdom and compassion come together - when the individuals 
involved have a deeper understanding of the interdependence of each other and the “ﬂ ow” (Surrey 
2005) of their relating to one another. They can realize how their dynamic comes into existence, 
how their thoughts affect their feelings and emotions, and how they behave with one another. In this 
moment, they can realize they don’t have to hold onto such a solid perspective of how they relate, that 
in this moment it can be different. This loosening of their reality can create hope for them; they don’t 
have to be so afraid of their emotions or suspicious of their partner and this in itself is transforming.
I tend to work with couples in a way that is reflective of Buddhist perspectives of 
interconnectedness and of how we relate to the world and with our own thoughts, emotions and 
behaviors. The basic premise of working with couples is one of developing awareness. I work with 
the dynamic of the couple in the present moment. I listen to their story and get to understand how 
they interrelate, what their values are, what emotions arise, their patterns of thinking and their 
habits of attachment. As well as talking about what happens, I look for the opportunity of this 
being demonstrated in the room. As an emotion arises we go into it – what is this feeling, how do 
you label it, what are the causes and conditions that lead to this emotion, and how do you relate to 
the other once this emotion arises? In general I draw from systems theory, dialogical perspectives 
and Emotion Focused Therapy.
THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES
So we have talked about how the therapeutic alliance sets the scene and provides 
an embracing atmosphere for change. In couples therapy the aim is to encourage attunement between 
the couple. It is a function of the therapist’s capacity for empathy that allows the emotions of 
the couple to arise. The habitual dynamic between them can appear, be explored and understood, 
and allow for the creation of a new experience. As this new experience is assimilated, it can create 
a sense of attunement between the couple. Other authors believe that therapy is less about the content
of what is happening in the dyad, and more about creating an experience of connection that may 
eventually change the neural patterning of each partner. (Roberts, 2007, Solomon and Tatkin, 
2011). This represents a new way of doing therapy, which historically has been about discussing 
the problems and working on communication and behavior. Of course behavioral approaches are 
important, but research is showing that acceptance therapy has more enduring long-term bene ﬁ ts 
(Jacobson et al, 2000). 
In working with couples, we must identify the deeper intentions of the couple. What brought 
them together in the ﬁ rst place? What has kept them together? What are their strengths? What do 
they want for themselves and the other person in this relationship? What are the values that they 
have and how do these values match in their coming together? 
THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES
166
Conference
Values are particularly important in a relationship as they form part of the contract between 
the couple. It may be that creating a family is a strong value and that is what has been part of 
the glue between them. It may be that they want to grow together spiritually. What are the personal 
values of integrity, honesty, mutual caring that they want to develop? These form a point of focus 
that we keep coming back to. It is in a sense the “view” of both partners as individuals in relationship 
to each other and the world in general. As in mindfulness practice, we must base our practice on 
our view. So it is with couples therapy. We must clarify the view if the relationship is to deepen and 
become sustainable.
Another very potent and interesting aspect of couples therapy is to notice the playing out of 
attraction and aversion in the relationship. As mentioned previously, from a Buddhist perspective 
we are often relating to others and having strong emotional content depending on whether we are 
operating out of attraction and aversion. When couples come to see me they will wax lyrical about 
all the things they don’t like about the other. At some point I will ask them what they liked about 
each other when they met. Almost without fail, they will use exactly the same words they had used 
previously. So we are seeing that what attracted them now is creating aversion. This is very useful 
because the couple can begin to see how their projections work and how unreliable their perceptions 
and emotions can be. 
I will now talk about the psychotherapeutic approaches I believe align with Buddhist thought 
which I have used successfully with couples.
Dialogical approach
As I have mentioned, it is the aspiration in couples therapy for each partner to be able to 
see through their projections and to be able to see the humanness of the other. Fishbane (1998) and 
Lysack (2008) discuss the importance of individuals being able to loosen up their own self-talk 
and to be able to focus on what is happening in the here and now. Rather than engaging in one’s 
own projections, one can deeply listen to the other person and, consequently, be able to put what is 
happening between them into context. She says it is important to be able to view the partner as “thou” 
-as an individual with their own thoughts, feelings and relationship with the world, rather than “it”. 
This enables the development of a dialogue between the couple whereby they can genuinely relate 
to the other as a whole person. This will lead to the development of empathy and compassion.
Systems theory
We are also working with couples from a systems theory perspective, where each partner 
is observed as well as the “relational space” between them (Zinker, 1994). The basic premise of 
systems theory is that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. Each part will impact on every 
other part of the system. Systems theory is similar to Buddhist theory because it looks at how things 
are interconnected; how causes and conditions come together to produce a behavioral and situational 
outcome. 
167
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
From a systems theory perspective, we are working not just with the content the couple 
presents but also the process of the dynamic between the couple. Understanding that the couple 
relationship operates as a system that is self-perpetuating and self-reinforcing, with the assumption 
that ﬁ rst, the system will operate in a way that will attempt to maintain the status quo and second, 
any change to one part of the system will evoke a change in the whole system.
It’s true that for the couple relationship that when one shifts, the other will shift. This might 
not necessarily always be for the beneﬁ t of the couple. For example, if one partner grows, developing 
insight and responsibility for their own thoughts, emotions and behavior, this will impact on 
the system. The other partner may try to grow and change as well. But more often operating from 
fear, s/he will try to encourage the partner with newfound insight or maturity to shift back. The one 
who is growing will not be able to do this, because once insight is born one cannot go back to being 
ignorant. If that partner tries to compromise their emerging insight and fakes it, it may preserve 
the relationship but will lead to a deep resentment on their part and unhappiness in the relationship. 
In therapy we explore when and how they system works well for the couple and when 
it becomes destructive. We also look at how the couple polarizes around certain issues. (Zinker, 
1994). How does one individual in the couple under-function and the other over-function? This 
can be related to emotional intimacy and sexual issues, for example, or to more task-related issues. 
One partner may be the “emotional one” in the relationship, while the other may be more closed 
down. In terms of relational space, both partners must contribute to the space between them, but 
sometimes one will over-function and do the emotional work for both of them. So when working 
with a couple it is important to bring awareness to the process and for both to see how they need to 
shift within that system. This relates very well with Buddhism, where everything is interdependent 
and nothing stays the same.
One important issue that comes up in relationship therapy is the polarization around 
intimacy. I often see couples who have different expectations about the amount of intimacy that is 
acceptable within the relationship. This is often the core issue we deal with. When one partner desires 
less intimacy than the other, or in a different form than the other, it sets up patterns of pursuing and 
distancing between them. These different levels of intimacy are often a re ﬂ ection of the history of 
attachment of each partner. So one of the things I do is look at how the couple manages different 
intimacy requirements – the amount of solitude  each partner needs,  and the time they need together 
in order for both to be comfortable. This often leads to an exploration of the ways in which they 
process their emotions in relation to their need for or fear of intimacy.
In the therapy room I am bringing to awareness the causes and conditions that are impacting 
on their thoughts, emotions and behaviors with each other. What are they bringing to the relationship 
in terms of habitual ways of relating? What are their values? What are the intentions towards the other 
person? How have they developed a system of relating that, over time, has become dysfunctional. 
In my work with Brad and Sally I was able to watch and comment on how their relational system 
works, bringing to light the causes and conditions of their functioning in relationships. I was able 
to identify their individual anxieties and how they are mutually reinforcing. As one partner began to 
feel anxious it then increased the anxiety of the other and then they both started to act in unhelpful 
and harmful ways towards each other. Their communication would falter and then they would 
begin to argue Sally would get more and more emotional (sometimes hysterical) and Brad would 
168
Conference
shout and walk out. Both would then feel more vulnerable and hurt. In being able to point out this 
dynamic it began to disempower that dynamic, to take some of the heat out of it. This initiated 
the process of acceptance. 
Emotion Focused Therapy (EFT)
For Brad and Sally we know that their emotional responses to each other come from their 
early childhood patterns of attachment. So we can look at how to help them to identify their feelings, 
label them, and learn to accept and work more directly with them. 
The ways in which each partner experiences their emotions form part of the important causes 
and conditions of how well the relationship functions. EFT is based on the premise that individu-
als are motivated by their emotions and that individuals will seek to move towards emotions that 
are less painful. In that way, the system can operate as it always has. With EFT, therapy can allow 
the individuals to access and work directly with painful emotions. Those emotions can then be 
transformed and the dysfunctional system can progress towards maturity and empathy.
EFT in couples therapy involves allowing emotions to arise in the room, and exploring 
the causes and conditions that lead to these emotions and the ways in which the dynamic between 
the couple perpetuates these emotions (Johnson, 2007). Focusing on emotions that are very immediate  
brings the process into the here and now, and it is a potent way of working. In effect, the emotions 
form the focus of mindfulness as a way of bringing the individual back to the present. Research has 
shown EFT to be effective in managing relationship stress (Baucom, et al, 1998, cited Makinene 
and Johnson, 2006) and cultivating forgiveness (Byrne et al, 2004).
According to Greenberg and Johnson (1988), emotions are an effective way of providing 
information about what is happening in the present moment. So when we work with couples, and 
we get an experience of the emotions of each partner at that time, then we can look at the causes 
and conditions that have led to those emotions in the room at that immediate point. EFT focuses on 
the emotional process in the couple. It observes how emotions arise in the present moment, facilitating 
an understanding of how each partner feels and the attachment issues that may underlie those emotions, 
with the intention of increasing empathy between the couple. (Johnson, 2007). The therapist focuses 
on the process of the emotions that arise rather than the content. 
EFT involves bringing emotions into awareness and exploring the causes and conditions 
that lead to these emotions. An important part is identifying the primary and secondary emotions. 
This therapy links into the early childhood patterns of relating.  Often people will present with 
one emotion as the problem (secondary emotion), but that emotion is often masking a more 
uncomfortable feeling (primary emotion). 
The secondary emotion Brad presented with was anger. When we looked underneath that 
anger we could hear the hurt and neglect from his past relationship with his mother and his fear of 
getting close with Sally. When this was brought up in the room it produced a shift in Brad; he was 
able to safely express his fears, and to cry. This allowed Sally to empathize with him, become less 
defensive, and feel more connected and less insecure in herself, because she felt that he did love her.  
169
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Brad reported some months later that he was able to feel his emotions more quickly when 
they arose, and to label them and let them go much more easily than ever before. 
Sally, too, became more conﬁ dent and self-accepting when she realized where her fears and 
anxieties had started. She was able to draw a direct comparison between when she felt abandoned 
by her mother and when Brad went away with his mates. Even though she still felt upset, she was 
not as crippled by anxiety as she used to be. 
Research is now showing that mindfulness practice can be a useful adjunct to EFT. When 
individuals practice mindfulness it enhances their capacity to observe their emotions as they arise, 
to label them and to have a greater capacity to be able to sit with their emotions and learn from them. 
(Beckerman and Sarracco, 2011).
Being able to sit with and accept our emotions is one of the basic aspects of mindfulness 
meditation. We don’t judge or try to change the feelings that arise but try to be open to experience 
the entire range of our emotional lives without hope and fear. As in Buddhist mindfulness 
meditation, as we learn to accept our emotions they can become self-liberated.  This acceptance 
forms the basis for compassion towards ourselves and the other person. EFT is another way we can 
help clients to open up to their authentic selves, and in so doing develop real compassion for each 
other within the relationship. 
Positive psychology
Positive psychology in couples therapy involves the therapist looking for and promoting 
the positive in the relationship between the couple. The focus is not so much on the problems 
and dysfunction but on acceptance and allowing the positives to emerge. With more attention on 
the positive, the couple’s frustration with any negativity between them may dissipate. According 
to Fredrickson’s broad and build theory (2001), positive emotions have the capacity to increase 
the emotional resilience of the individual and their social responsibility (Styron, 2005). We can 
then assume that as we increase the positive emotions for the couple, this will cultivate resilience in 
the relationship.
Seligman (2002) asserts that positive emotions are able to undo negative emotions. Positive 
psychology is about taking a positive approach to the past, the present and the future. So the future 
can be hopeful and optimistic, and the past is viewed with a sense of satisfaction and contentment. 
The present can then be a happier, calm and pleasurable experience in the moment. 
Kauffman and Silberman (2009) discuss PPI (positive psychology interventions) with couples 
in therapy. This approach involves three main steps. First, it cultivates a balanced acknowledgement 
of the negative/problematic and positive aspects of the relationship. What are the strengths, what 
works? Second, it develops the positive between the couple; and third, it explores how each partner 
can help develop the positive in each other. 
Good relationships have been shown to have a higher positive to negative ratio of 5:1 
(Kauffman and Silberman 2009). At an early point in the therapy I will ask the couple “what brought 
you together?” This question usually softens the couple’s attitudes towards each other even if they’re 
170
Conference
having a lot of conﬂ ict. They remember the good times, the positive feelings for each other. This is 
what I try to build on as a starting point for change. Mindfulness is important here – being aware of 
how much energy is being put into the negative rather than the positive aspects of the relationship.
As for Brad and Sally, I was able to help them move to a happier place in their relationship. 
They both felt a strong alliance with me and with each other during our therapy. I held them safely 
in the sessions while we explored their fears and the obstacles to their expression of love for each 
other. Both reported feeling more accepted by me and by each other and over time their emotions 
became more contained and their destructive behaviors dissipated. Although they still have times 
when they get anxious or angry, overall they are much happier in their relationship. Our therapy 
ﬁ nished two years ago when they decided they were ready to get married. I have since discovered 
that Sally gave birth to a baby girl nine months ago.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The future of therapy with couples may be to offer mindfulness and loving-kindness training 
for individuals and couples as a basis for enhancing relationships. Our larger counseling agencies 
could offer regular programs as part of a holistic approach to working on relationship issues. In this 
scenario, therapist training programs in mindfulness would be crucial in future development of 
the practice of couple therapy. 
As the mindfulness movement moves from a focus on the alleviation of individual suffering 
to embracing compassion for others, scienti ﬁ c research is validating what the Buddha knew 
centuries ago. Western psychology is increasingly turning towards Buddhist theories and techniques 
as a complement to their approaches to psychotherapy with individuals and now, more recently, 
with couples. 
We are seeing a paradigm shift that may form the basis for the explosion of Buddhism in 
the West. As a culture there may be a natural shift to taking refuge in the Triple Gem, rather than 
in the false refuge of romantic love. Intimate relationships may then be based on a love that is 
accepting, expansive and fully compassionate. Couples can then rely on meditation practices and 
the guidance of the six paramitas (virtues) to form the basis of their relationships.  
As Buddhist psychotherapists we have a wonderful opportunity to form part of this changing 
paradigm. May our work be of beneﬁ t to all beings.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
171
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
References
Baer, R.A (2003). Mindfulness training as a clinical intervention: A conceptual and empirical review. 
Clinical psychology: Science and practice. Wiley Online Library.
Baker, L and McNulty, J (2011) Self-compassion and relationship maintenance: The moderating 
roles of conscientiousness and gender. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
100(5) 853-873.
Barnes, S., Brown, K.W., Krusemark, E., Campbell, W.K & Rogge, R.D.(2007) The role of 
mindfulness in romantic relationship satisfaction and responses to relationship stress. 
Journal of Marital and Family Therapy. 33(4), 482-500.
Beckerman and Sarracco, (2011) Intervening with couples in relationship con ﬂ ict: Integrating 
emotionally focused couple therapy and attachment theory. Family therapy. 29(1) 23-32
Birnie, K, Speca, M and Carlson, L.E, (2010) Exploring self-compassion and empathy in the context 
of Mindfulness-based Stress Reduction (MBSR). Stress and Health,
Block-Lerner, J., Adair, C., Plumb, J.C., Rhatigan, D.L and Orsillo, S.M. (2007). The case for 
mindfulness-based approaches in the cultivation of empathy: Does nonjudgmental, 
present-moment awareness increase capacity for perspective-taking and empathic concern? 
Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 33, 501-516.
Brahm, A.(2006) Mindfulness, bliss and Beyond. Wisdom MA
Brown, K.W., Ryan, R.M and Cresswell, D.J. (2007) Mindfulness: Theoretical foundations and 
evidence for its salutary effects. Psychological Inquiry. 18(4) 211-237
Bruce, N.G., Manber, R, Shapiro, S.L and Constantino, M.J. (2010) Psychotherapist mindfulness 
and the psychotherapy process. Psychotherapy, Research, Practice, Training. 47(1) 83-97.
Burpee, L.C and Langer, E.J (2005) Mindfulness and Marital Satisfaction. Journal of Adult 
Development, 12, (1).
Byrne, M., Carr, A & Clark M (2004) The efﬁ cacy of behavioral couples therapy and emotionally 
focused therapy for couple distress. Contemporary family therapy 26 (4) 361-387.
Carson. J.W, Carson K.M, Gil, K.M and Baucom D.H (2004) Mindfulness-based relationship 
enhancement. Behavior Therapy, 35, 471-494.
Carson. J.W, Carson K.M, Gil, K.M and Baucom D.H (2006) Self-expansion as a mediator of 
relationship improvements in a mindfulness intervention. Journal of Marital and Family 
Therapy 33(4) 517-528.
Cooper,  P(2008) Being the moment. Psychoanalytic review. 95 (2) 285.
Diamond, L.M (2004) Emerging perspectives on distinctions between romantic love and sexual 
desire. American Psychological Society, 13 (3), 116-119
References
172
Conference
Fishbane, M (1998) I, thou and we: A dialogical approach to couples therapy, 24 (1), 41-58.
Fishbane, M (2007) Wired to connect: Neuroscience, relationships and therapy. Family processes. 
46(3) 395-412.
Fredrickson, B.L (2001) The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The broaden and 
build theory of positive emotions. American Psychologist, 56, 218-226.
Fruzetti, A.E and Iverson, K.M. (2005) Mindfulness, acceptance, validation and “individual” 
psychopathology in couples. In S.C. Hayes, V .M Follett and M.M. Linehan (eds) 
Mindfulness and acceptance p 168-192. Guildford Press. NY .
Fuchs, T.(2007) Psychotherapy of the lived space: A phenomenological and ecological concept. 
American Journal of Psychotherapy, 61 (4) 423-439
Fulton, P. (2005) Mindfulness as clinical training.  In Germer, C.K, Siegel, R.D. and Fulton, P. (eds) 
Mindfulness and Psychotherapy. The Guilford Press. NY
Gambrel, L.E and Keeling, M.L. (2010) Relational aspects of mindfulness: Implications for 
the practice of marriage and family therapy. Contemporary Family Therapy. 32, 412-426.
Gehart, D.R and McCollum, E.E (2007) Engaging suffering: Towards a mindful re-visioning of family 
therapy practice. 33(2) 214-226.
Germer, C. (2009) The mindful path to self-compassion. Guilford. NY
Glaser, A.(2005) A call to compassion: Bringing Buddhist practices of the heart into the soul of 
psychology.
Gottmann, J and Silver, N. (1999).The seven principles of making marriage work. Orion House, 
London, UK.
Greenberg, L.S and Johnson, S.M (1988) Emotionally focused therapy for couples. Guildford 
Press, NY and London.
Greenberg, L.S and Pavia, S.C. (1997) Working with emotions in psychotherapy. Guilford Press NY
Grepmair, L, Mitterlehner, F, Loew, T, Bachler, E, Rother, W & Nickel, M. (2007) Promoting 
mindfulness in psychotherapists in training in ﬂ uences the treatment results of their 
patients: A randomized, double-blind, controlled study in psychotherapy and 
psychosomatics. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 76, 332-338
Hayes, A. M and Feldman, G. (2004) Clarifying the construct of mindfulness in the context of 
emotional regulation and the process of change in therapy. Clinical psychology: Science 
and practice. 11 (3) 255-262
Hubble, M.A., Duncan, B.L and Miller, S.D. (1999) The heart and soul of change. American 
Psychological Association.
173
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Jacobson, N.S., Christensen, A., Prince, S.E., Cordova, J., Eldridge, K (2000) Integrative behavioral 
couple therapy: An acceptance based, promising new treatment for couple discord. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68(2), 351-355.
Johnson, S.M. (2007) The contribution of emotionally focused couples therapy. Journal of 
Contemporary Psychotherapy Springer.
Kauffman and Silberman (2009) Finding and fostering the positive in relationships: Positive 
interventions in couples therapy. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65(5) 520-531 
Lapides. F, (2010) The Implicit Realm in Couples Therapy: Improving Right Hemisphere 
Affect-Regulating Capabilities, Clinical Social Work Journal.
Lysack, (2008) Relational mindfulness and dialogic space in family therapy. In Hick, S and Bien, 
T. Mindfulness and the Therapeutic Relationship. Guildford, London, NY .
Makinene, J. & Johnson, S.M. (2006) Resolving attachment injuries in couples using emotionally 
focused therapy: Steps towards forgiveness and reconciliation. Journal of consulting and 
clinical psychology. 74(6) 1055-1064.
Mirghain, S.A and Cordova, J.V (2007) Emotion skills and marital health: the association between 
observed and reported emotion skills, intimacy and marital satisfaction. Journal of Social 
and Clinical Psychology. 26 (9) 983-1009.
Neff, L.A and Karney, B.R. (2009) Compassionate love in early marriage In Fehr, B, Sprecher, 
S and Underwood, LG (eds) The Science of Compassionate Love: Theory, Research and 
Applications. Wiley-Blackwell UK.
Neff, K. (2009) The role of self-compassion in development: A healthier way to relate to oneself. 
Human development, 52, 211-214.
Neff, K. (2011) Self-compassion: stop beating yourself up and leave insecurity behind. Hodder and 
Stoughton USA
Rait, D.S (2000) The Therapeutic Alliance in Couples and Family Therapy. Psychotherapy in 
Practice, 56(2) 211-224
Roberts, (2007) Brain biology and couple therapy. Handbook of Clinical Issues in Couple Therapy. 
Ryan, R.M. and Brown, K.W. (2003) Why we don’t need self-esteem: On fundamental needs, 
contingent love, and mindfulness. Psychological Inquiry, 14(1), 71-76.
Safran, J.D and Muran, J.C. (2000) Negotiating the therapeutic alliance. Guilford NY
Safran and Reading, (2008) Mindfulness, meta-communication and affect regulation in 
psychoanalytic treatment.
Shapiro, S.L and Carson, L.E.(2009) The art and Science of Mindfulness: Integrating mindfulness 
into psychology and the helping professions. American Psychological Association 
Washington
174
Conference
Siegel, D.J (2007) The mindful brain: Reﬂ ection and Attunement in the Cultivation of Well-being. 
Norton. NY . 
Siegel, D.J.(2009). Mindful awareness, mindsight and neural Integration. The Humanistic 
Psychologist, 37, 137-158.
Siegel, D.J.(2010) Mindsight: The new science of personal transformation. Bantam. USA.
Siegelman, E.Y .(1990) Metaphors of the therapeutic encounter. Journal of Analytical Psychology, 
35, 175-191
Seligman, M (2002) Authentic Happiness. William Heinemann, Sydney, Australia. 
Solomon, M and Tatkin. S. Love and war in intimate relationships: Connection, disconnection and 
mutual regulation in couple therapy. Norton, NY . 
Snyder. R, Shapiro. S and Treleaven. D. (2011) Attachment theory and mindfulness. Journal of 
Child and Family Studies.
Styron, C.W (2005) Positive psychology: Awakening to the fullness of life. In Germer, C.K and 
Siegel, R.D. and Fulton, P (eds) Mindfulness and Psychotherapy. The Guilford Press. NY
Surrey, J.L.(2005) Relational psychotherapy, relational mindfulness in Germer, C., Siegel, R. and 
Fulton, P (eds) Mindfulness and psychotherapy. Guilford Press, NY .
Traleg Kyabgon (2001) The Essence of Buddhism. Shambhala Boston.
Trungpa, C (1976) 1975 Seminary Hinayana-Mahayana.Vajradhatu. USA
Trungpa, C (2005). The sanity we are born with: A Buddhist approach to psychology. Shambhala 
Boston
Trungpa, C (2011) Work, sex, money: Real life on the path of mindfulness Shambhala Publications 
Boston
Wang, (2007) Mindfulness meditation: Its personal and professional impact on psychotherapists. 
Dissertation.
Wiebel, D.T. (2007) A loving-kindness intervention: Boosting compassion for self and others. 
Dissertation.
Zinker, J.C. (1994) In search of good form: Gestalt therapy with couples and families. Jossey-Bass 
Publishers, San Francisco.
175
Images of Anger & the Ramifi cations of Anger Management
(with a focus on Domestic Violence)
Dr. Dion Oliver Peoples
Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University, Thailand
“Here you stand, after conquering mighty nations and subduing the world. I therefore think 
it foolish for me to [provoke] you with words, as though you were men who had not been 
proved in action. ...what is sweeter for a brave man than to seek revenge with his own hand? 
It is a right of nature to glut the soul with vengeance. Let us then attack the foe eagerly; 
...I will not say by the ﬁ rst wound, ...Seek swift victory in that spot where the battle rages.  
...Let the wounded exact in return the death of his foe; let the unwounded revel in slaughter 
of the enemy. No spear shall harm those who are sure to live; and those who are sure to 
die...  Fate overtakes even in peace...”1
--Attila the Hun.
“Holding anger, like a mother holding the baby… because, loving kindness is us, but anger 
is also us.  So one part of us is taking good care of another part.  Anger is a kind of energy 
that comes from our self, and loving-kindness or mindfulness is also another kind of energy.  
That is why we should know that every time the energy of anger is there, we should invite 
the energy of mindfulness to be there - in order to take care of anger.”2 
--Thich Nhat Hanh 
Introduction:
There are a lot of people discussing the ordeals that military veterans face – the phrase: 
post-traumatic stress syndrome has been used often.  I have listened to the proceedings from 
the Sakyadhita Conference on Buddhist Women: Leading to Liberation3 - and as a male military veteran 
who served for a decade, there are many issues that veterans must face that remain incomprehensible 
to the civilian world.  Dr. Barbara Wright was speaking at that conference, and I was amazed at her 
presentation which spoke directly to my heart; further, her book: Metta: The Map, The Formula, 
The Equations – is a really useful tool for anyone working to overcome problematic episodes in their 
life, through examples of conversation.  Her book teaches us to comprehend other perspectives and 
1  The Origin and Deeds of the Goths, by Jordanes, Translated by Charles C. Mierow (as part of his PhD Dissertation) 
(Princeton: Princeton University, 1908), Section XXXIX:  http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/14809/pg14809.html - 
accessed on 30 April 2011 – and remain mindful of the Yodhajiva Sutta that suggests that anyone dying for the sake of 
the military – that the soldier is dying with wrong views, and as such will venture into lower realms after death.  
2  My transcription, slightly edited, from: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tZKrl5n79hY – accessed on 29 June 2011
3  http://www.12thsakyadhitathai.org/12thlive/index.php/ - live broadcast on 15 June 2011
Introduction:
176
Conference
to become more intelligent4.  She is here at this conference, so I should let her speak for herself, 
through her conference paper in this volume.  
But let us suppose we have some problems in our life; and if we are to reintegrate back 
into society as productive members, we need some training to stabilize ourselves.  Buddhism holds 
the key.  The Buddha, before his enlightenment, was a member of this very similar military class 
– therefore understanding the ways of killing, should have been part of his upbringing.  There are 
a few people attending this conference this year with military-backgrounds, and our experiences 
with various forms of violence may assist in our penetrations into the Buddhadhamma.  We may 
know: not to be violent, because we were in some form violent-people ourselves.  Evidence though 
of the Buddha’s training is shown during the skills he had to demonstrate prior to his wedding, when 
he had to exhibit his prowess above and beyond those of his peers and rivals.  Later, he spends six 
years of war endeavoring as a striving-ascetic, and soldiered on as the Fully Enlightened Buddha 
for forty-ﬁ ve years.
Antagonistic rivals are created in interesting ways.  In Western discourses, one powerful 
ﬁ gure looms over our culture, or for those who have confronted the Christianization of our 
militarized societies brought on by the expansion of the Roman Empire – certainly for those with 
a European upbringing: Attila the Hun, was able to organize the anger of his people, and direct that 
anger towards a certain aim – in a sense, manipulating his soldiers to managing their anger, albeit in 
a manner that meets with disapproval within Buddhism.  However, at the personal level, Attila was 
known to be: “mild and gentle”5 – something that Buddhists would applaud.  Western discourses 
pitched the Capitalistic-Western World against the Communistic-Eastern World – in a decades long 
Cold-War, of which I was raised within, because my own parents were enlisted-service members.  
I, too, enlisted likewise, into the Air Force, becoming an intelligence-analyst.  I did a lot of 
‘intelligence’ work for the wars in Kosovo, and elsewhere on the European continent, from 1992-2002.  
It should be known that Thailand’s Theravada Buddhism has a treatise which legitimizes 
conﬂ ict, this can be found inside: A Special Auspicious Allocation, by His Holiness Prince Vajirañāṇa, 
the 10th Supreme Patriarch of the Kingdom of Thailand.  Through taking upon the aspiration of 
life-longevity, and being righteous in order to avoid negligence – wise advantaged will accrue.6  
Through the three qualities of a desire for righteousness, welfare and a policy of governance: though 
the desire for righteousness we can surmise the rationalization for violence, through his utterance: 
“one [must] disburse one’s wealth in order to cure such wound; should a limb become useless, and 
it becomes necessary to amputate the limb in order to preserve life, then one should consent to 
the amputation of that limb, since it is better to preserve one’s life.”7  It is known that in traditional 
Thai society, wealth was determined by how many men could be controlled – and used in times of 
war or as slave-labor.  This system was known as the sakdina-system [power-system over the land], 
where: “The king allocated amount the nai-packages of duties and privileges which combined 
administrative responsibilities, military service, resplendent titles, and shares in the control of people 
4  See: B.R. Wright, PhD.: Metta: The Map, The Formula, The Equations (USA: Metta Press, 2009), pp. 2-3: 
She demonstrates three forms of intelligence: mind-intelligence (cognitive manipulation of ideas… expressed through 
understanding), heart-intelligence (emotional-knowledge… expressed through our compassion), and energy-intelligence 
(instinctive/primal knowledge… expressed through our commitments)
5  http://www29.homepage.villanova.edu/christopher.haas/embassy.htm Embassy to Attila:  Priscus of Panium - accessed 
on 15 June 2011
6  His Holiness Prince Vajirañāṇa: A Special Auspicious Allocation (Bangkok: Mahamakut University Press, 1995), pp. 46-47
7  His Holiness Prince Vajirañ āṇa: A Special Auspicious Allocation (Bangkok: Mahamakut University Press, 1995), p. 50
177
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
(phrai: indentured peasants, forced to become tattooed to show their status as a servant).”8  While 
the slave-system was terminated by King Chulalongkorn (Rama V), the terminology of being a phrai 
was resurrected during the recent social-con ﬂ ict that infected Thailand during the Yellow & Red 
Shirts conﬂ ict, which has angered many people across Thailand, ﬁ ghting for greater social-justice and 
the elimination of economic-disparity.  People across the world have demanded basic human-rights: 
jobs & justice.9  War and servitude is entrenched into our societies.  Such externalized-violence 
has a tendency to affect our personal behavior: many studies on post-traumatic stress syndrome and 
other diagnoses have been produced following the aftermath of wars.   
This article though should deal with personal demons, rather than external demons that 
may have shaped the character of any youth with a variety of in ﬂ uences.  Buddhism suggests 
someone should prevent the arising of, and make amends for anger, which brings on more virtue.10   
The Visuddhimagga further claims that the Majjhima-Nikaya states: “…he who entertained hate in 
his heart, on that account he would not be one who carried out my teachings; and that the Samyutta-
Nikaya states: To repay angry mean in kind is worse than to be angry ﬁ rst; repay not angry men in 
kind and win a battle hard to win.  The weal of both he does promote: his own and then the other’s 
too – who shall another’s anger know and mindfully maintain his peace.11  Is anyone tired and weary 
of being like our friend, Attila the Hun?  Does anyone want to lay down their arms, in peace?   
Are you tired of ﬁ ghting with your lover and beating your children?   Can we surrender… give up… 
quit our violent ways?  The cycle of violence must terminate with us, so we don’t repeat it.  I try to 
raise my sons under this vision.  
Domestic Violence and Anger Management:
Before Buddhism enters the sphere or realm of one’s consciousness, a person may not look 
at the world in such a manner as one would see the world - as if one was a fully-ordained monk.  
After being a fully-ordained forest-monk, and being the recipient of or witnessing all of the social-
courtesies being bestowed upon oneself for being a bhikkhu, re-entering the realm of normal-society 
is very challenging, particularly on the streets of Bangkok.  Sounds assault the auditory-system, 
pedestrians rudely push one another and eventually yourself, stenches ﬁ ll the nose unwantedly – it’s 
enough to make one shutter for days, to give someone tinnitus for about four days.  Culture shock 
may not be the word.  The world outside the monastery is really aggressive, and can easily make 
someone angry.  Where else, perhaps, than in Thailand, can you go to the market and get harassed 
because you might be a foreigner; be confronted by drugged-individuals who slap your arms with 
their contagious herpes-infested hands; nearly ran-down by bicyclists or motorcyclists riding on 
the sidewalks, nearly having to ﬁ ght to exit the skytrain, and deal with an assortment of other 
verbal-abuses and questionable activities.  One wonders that if the Buddhist people in this nation 
are indeed Buddhists, then the public behavior of many in the markets and streets would be differ-
8  Pasuk Phongpaichit & Chris Baker: Thailand: Economy and Politics (Kuala Lampur: Oxford University Press, 2000), 
pp. 11-12
9  See the speech (circa: 1985) by the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan, on People Organized and Working for 
Economic Rebirth, at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3QMTMxNq25s – last accessed on 20 October 2011
10  Bhadahtacariya Buddhaghosa (Bhikkhu Nanamoli, trans.): Visuddhimagga – The Path of Puriﬁ cation (Seattle: Buddhist 
Publication Society, Pariyatti Editions, 1999), I 151
11  Bhadahtacariya Buddhaghosa (Bhikkhu Nanamoli, trans.): Visuddhimagga – The Path of Puriﬁ cation (Seattle: Buddhist 
Publication Society, Pariyatti Editions, 1999), IX 15
Domestic Violence and Anger Management:
178
Conference
ent.  But the truth is, these people are no more Buddhist than the Muslim is Islamic, or the Christian 
is a true follower – every society has hypocrites.  There are bad-negligent people in every 
neighborhood – but more are concentrated in some areas than others.  Some people live in places 
where there is a higher concentration of people who make it easy for peaceful people to become 
angered.  This occurs in the public sphere, and we often deal with these situations alone.
As we get older in our lives, we take on private, domestic-partnerships.  Inside our private 
homes, things happen away from the watchful eyes of the public.  Perhaps our righteous behavior 
begins to wane behind closed doors.  It may be time to not have two lives, but to make one’s public 
life, into his private life – just to clear out all the skeletons in one’s closet.  We should live with 
nothing to hide – and live so that we have nothing to hide.  We often need to become the person or 
the change that we want, in order to gain what we wish.  In other words: the peaceful-public man (or 
woman) should be that very same person, in his household (or her home).  The allegedly angry or 
reactionist must learn to become more internally angry (but of course implying being more at peace) 
or at peace publically (only having internal anger – but even that must be reduced).  We have our 
private life and our public life – often these two worlds never meet.  Many parents proclaim stances 
against engaging into violent-abusive spankings of children or beating up the spouse – but sometimes 
something happens inside the home, unexpectedly, and someone gets hurt.  Our culture teaches this 
and reinforces this.  Such, seemingly, well-adjusted males may become victims of verbal-abuse 
from women, and from such an abusive situation, a reaction occurs – a reaction in which no one 
expected or could have predicted.  Men have, on occasion, “hit” their domestic-partner (girlfriend 
or wife) - this activity may happen in same-sex relationships, but this territory is excluded from the 
researcher’s realm of interests.  Domestic violence is something that is not needed in households – 
certainly when there are young, developing children in the homes who absorb what they see, and 
would later react likewise.  Parents don’t need to beat their children and spouses don’t need to beat 
each other, and siblings can also become civil.  
For the generation of people that grew up around music-television, and modern popular 
music, various forms of violence are a part of the culture.  Minds are entrenched around these 
circumstances.  Anger is not one’s personalized friend, it is a form of unpro ﬁ table consciousness 
– someone can use it towards productive ends (for example: writing a good song), but sooner or 
later it becomes corrosive or anger overwhelms the bearer, and what remains is but a remnant of 
one’s former self.  Anger or hatred (dosa): “…has the characteristic of savageness, like a provoked 
snake.  Its function is to spread, like a drop of poison, or its function is to burn up its own support, 
like a forest ﬁ re.  It’s manifested as persecuting (dūsana), like an enemy who has got his chance.  Its 
proximate cause is the grounds for annoyance.  It should be regarded as like stale urine mixed with 
poison.”12  The most peaceful person can blow-up with rage, as a volcano erupts ash and lava – 
a person just gets hot, when set off.   A person is like a bottle of soda on the shelf, peaceful when at 
rest, undisturbed; but once shaken or dealt with in a wrong manner, the bottle erupts and everyone 
around gets sprayed.  Why then, do people try to make other people angry?  This sort of behavior also 
occurs on social-network sites, where many young-monastic students have their pages, often under 
fake names, and use very un-Buddhist speech – perhaps as an outlet for their hormonal-confusion.  
There are people all over such sites like ‘Facebook’ – that cannot control their anger; these people 
deﬁ nitely need to learn some sort of anger-management.  
12  Bhadahtacariya Buddhaghosa (Bhikkhu Nanamoli, trans.): Visuddhimagga – The Path of Puriﬁ cation (Seattle: Buddhist 
Publication Society, Pariyatti Editions, 1999), XIV , 171, p. 474
179
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Someplace, a joke-statement was read from an internet-site, and to paraphrase: “Hell-yeah 
I spank my kids; and if he has a problem with that later in his life, he can go to therapy!”  Many 
people are unlikely to subscribe to this type of message.  Many people have encountered a lot of 
various types of anger in their lives and over the course of several years of social-consciousness, 
and stumbling upon a lot of information on the topic – many people never attend therapy-session.  
Instead, many therapy sessions are cloaked in our media: news-reports offering negative imagery, 
movies and music putting the themes in their mediums, preachers teaching about the messages 
in their mosques, temples or churches, and classroom teachers incorporating the theme into their 
lectures.   Many people have engaged into self-therapy.  There is a huge market for books related to 
self-therapy, and there are television programs that cater to this theme.  Many of these therapeutic-
remedies or rather instructions, are somehow faith-based or cloaked in religious rhetoric.  There are 
also many self-help gurus who contribute philosophical or psychological studies into their works, 
aimed at helping troubled people.  
Likewise, Buddhism instructs those who wish to come and see, how mental de ﬁ lements 
can become puri ﬁ ed, or eliminated from one’s consciousness.  For instance - rather than killing 
the abuser or the other, potential-victim: the only type of killing that that Buddha approves of is 
the killing of one’s anger.13  When this anger is assassinated, one can sleep soundly and shall not 
be sorrowful.  A wise and skillful person is someone living righteously, without anger, “ tamed”, 
and has the welfare of others as his concern - because when he can possess the cure of maintaining 
peace in the face of an angered rival, he cures frustrations.  Anyone taking revenge makes things 
worse for himself14 – like a difﬁ cult, unending jihad.
In the United States, for instance, many of the recent converts to Buddhism are of generations 
quite different from traditional Asian cultures and as such: instead of being inherently good people 
fostered in the socio-philosophical guidance system of what Buddhism can be, converts instead try 
to be good people and often there are elements of overcompensation and sometimes stressful-failure.  
Many Buddhists, globally, have grown up in military households (akin to being a member of 
the warrior-class), and when parents are away serving in the armed forces, children become latch-key 
kids.  Older siblings are watching over younger siblings for hours alone, without adult supervision.  
Kids are also are fascinated by militaristic behavior – a type of primitive mode of rationale: “you 
have done bad to me, I will punish you through force” – this is reinforced through the cartoons 
and other programming that the youth view.  Parents come home, and the younger sibling tells on 
the older sibling, and it is the older sibling that gets punished through a spanking, for trying to 
control the younger sibling.  What is good for adults is not good for children – and this becomes 
a very confusing situation.  Children are taught to get along, yet the generations in power can behave 
dictatorial and abusive.  We see this hypocrisy globally, when dominant imperialistic nations exert 
their will upon lesser-developed nations.  Through a sense of protectionism modes of isolationism 
develop, fostered by this sense of a need to prevent outside-antagonists from exploitation or threats; 
nations or people decide to develop themselves when the outside world is failing to properly encourage 
the well-being of the entity.  
13  Bhikkhu Bodhi: The Connected Discourses of the Buddha – A New Translation of the Samyutta Nikaya, V ol. I (Boston: 
Wisdom Publications, 2000), - to the Devata: p. 133; to Vatrabhū: p. 140; to a Brahmin: p. 255; to Sakka: p. 337
14  Bhikkhu Bodhi: The Connected Discourses of the Buddha – A New Translation of the Samyutta Nikaya, V ol. I (Boston: 
Wisdom Publications, 2000), pp. 256-257
180
Conference
Some youngsters isolate themselves into the conﬁ nes of their bedrooms; and when a scenario 
or things went wrong in the household – ending in something like a form of child-abuse: some of 
these children often sit alone listening to genres or songs that fuel the emotions of the abused – 
helping to get them out, emotionally, from dif ﬁ cult times.  Music is often therapeutic, and makes 
people feel better.15  A few years ago, Hatebreed, a hardcore-metal band, put out a music video 
that seriously addressed the theme of domestic violence.16  In this video, viewers can see that there 
are people who care – if only others knew of the violence or it’s potentiality to exist - there is 
support and protection.  A hip-hop artist (a notable rapper and producer), RZA put out a short movie17 
and a video18, actually entitled: Domestic Violence – that had a huge impact within urban culture.  
The short movie and video illustrates that both males and females are responsible; but in the music 
video we can listen to a verbally-abusive woman serving as the catalyst for the protagonist played 
by RZA, to tell her, in simpli ﬁ ed terms: to leave and never come back.  RZA though, in his song, 
addresses the problems in their relationship, to justify the termination of the relationship.  Both of 
these videos should be seen by maturing-students.  We learn that children should not be raised in 
homes like this, and as we may be still youthful adults, we should to endeavor to never raise our 
own children in similar circumstances.  
Further, and it is the hope that this paragraph illuminates a very controversial issue: 
people suffering from herpes must also learn to manage stress in order to reduce their outbreaks.  
Episodes of stress often resurrect the virus.19  When the Buddha has mentioned that the Angry-person 
becomes ugly – we may surmise that he was also treating or addressing the symptoms that anger 
induces.  Further, upon researching a lot of psychological/medical articles related to the subject of 
domestic violence and anger – few discuss the resurrection of herpes, the virus leading to infectious 
cold-sores.  Further, there are people who suffer from some diseases, like herpes, which if stress or 
anger occurs in their life, an outbreak begins anew in the body of the sick person.  In more ways than 
one, a person susceptible to anger needs to manage his or her life, to avoid being the ugly-demon.  
Being a victim to unwanted contact resurrects hostilities in people – it’s like non-sexualized rape.  
Why must other people assault other people, why can’t people just leave other people alone when 
contact is not wanted?  
Buddhism does not provide adequate advice for such encounters, and it may be best to toss 
out Buddhist principles for some situations.  This may not be the proper Buddhist reaction – but 
what is proper in that situation: giving thanks and appreciation for a new disease?  The father cannot 
give proper physical-love to his children and wife because of this unfortunate circumstance; and 
must instead think about how to give more mental love to his two sons and wife – he must keep 
15  There was even a recent video uploaded from The Deen Show, a popular program on Islamic themes, see for instance: 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nKzAmkB44ik&feature=player_embedded – people get very involved in music, and 
these messages begin to have effects upon people and their states.  Plato was even skeptical about the power of music.
16  Hatebreed: To the Threshold (of ﬁ cial video): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKZZHHyNz6I – accessed on 26 
April 2011.  From their album: ‘Satisfaction is the Death of Desire’, they released a song called: ‘Conceived Through 
An Act of Violence’ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PBWq1OtN7Cc accessed on 20 October 2011 – which may be 
the foundation for many youth’s lives, thrown into a living-hell: unwanted pregnancies derived from date-rapes or even 
being raised in single-parent homes – today’s young children are truly alienated from humane expressions of love.
17  RZA: Domestic Violence ( ﬁ lm): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KISU66F_IIM – accessed on 26 April 2011
18  RZA: Domestic Violence (music video): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A4bu_6yUg4Y – accessed on 26 April 
2011; or at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lw3tjdCM3LU&feature=related – if the above cannot be viewed – accessed 
on 10 June 2011
19  See, for instance: http://www.herpes.org/herpesinfo/smartliving.shtml - accessed on 7 June 2011
181
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
the disease away from them, and must not spread the illness.  Children do not need to be around 
their ugly-infectious father, who from his love for them cannot hug them, and cannot have them 
touch his sores – because they in their innocence do not need to suffer from dwelling with their 
imperfect father.  He must remain ever-vigilant and protective, in a sense - controlling: suppressing 
his stress or potentials for stress to arise in order to prevent outbreaks and the potential to infect 
his family.  In studies of Buddhist discourses, the one presented below, seems to better address 
the universals behind the issues for controlling anger, from the social and medical perspectives.  
Knowing What the Buddha Said in a Discourse about Anger20:
In the Jataka Stories, or past-life stories of the Buddha: is the Bodhisatta supposed to be 
the Buddha?  People get the image that the Buddha was never a man of some emotion, or that he 
is this extreme paci ﬁ st.  The Gahapati-Jataka has an interesting story, of the Bodhisatta as being 
a householder’s son, who was recently married.  Sometime after settling down, his wife began to take 
an interest in the village headman.  The Bodhisatta discovered the two together and after capturing 
them, the Bodhisatta: “seized the headman by the lock of hair on the top of his head, dragged him 
out into the courtyard, threw him down… [and] thrashed him till the man was faint.  Then he took 
him by the neck and cast him out of the house.  The wicked woman [his wife], he seized her by 
the hair of her head, pulled her away… knocked her down, and threatened her: ‘If you ever do this 
kind of thing again, I’ll make you remember it!’”  He must have learned something from that episode, 
because in his ﬁ nal life, he behaved differently.
In the sense of the man infected with herpes by the sick-man, the man struck the sick man 
hoping that the lesson will be learned to never touch and infect another person again.  We can interact 
in non-neutral manners with someone in two ways, either they create us to be a rival or we create 
them into being a rival.21  It is within our animal nature to view others as some sort of challenge.  
We may not like that another person is visually more appealing than us.  We may wish that they 
never sleep well.  We may wish that a rival shall never prosper.  We may wish that a rival never 
become wealthy.  We may wish that a rival may never become famous.  We may wish that a rival 
never have any friends.  We may even wish that our rivals join the abyss of a ﬁ ery hell.  As like when 
a sufferer of herpes faces an episode of induced stress: indeed the angry man turns to be ugly, and 
after this arising of heat, the fever-blister appears to disﬁ gure the angered person.  It’s hard to sleep 
when angered, and people always remind young couples that they should never go to sleep angry.  
In the heat of the argument, a person loses one’s senses and actually ﬁ nds pleasure in 
unwholesome activities.  One would not care if the rival is put to death during anger – blind 
darkness indeed reigns.  Yet, when this episode of wrath has diminished, suffering may overwhelm 
one with adequate senses.  It is also said that being angry is suicidal: one kills one’s self image – 
others will not see the angry person in the same manner.  Even Mara can snare someone during 
the period of one’s loathsome form.  Therefore, the only way away from such obscurations is 
becoming freed from anger, trouble, greed, and coveting.  When our minds are thus controlled, 
we can be cool in otherwise stressful situations.  We have to comprehend anger.  The next section 
20  E. M. Hare: The Book of the Gradual Sayings (Anguttara Nik āya), V ol. IV (London: P āli Text Society, 1965), 
pp. 58-62.
21  Satt’ ime bhikkhave dhamm ā sattakantā sapattakaraṇā kodhanaṃ āgacchanti itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā Katame satta?  -  
E. Hardy (ed.): The Aṅguttara-Nikāya, Part IV (London: Pali Text Society, 1979), LX, p. 94
Knowing What the Buddha Said in a Discourse about Anger20:
182
Conference
covers the non-verbal or bodily actions of someone dominated by the unwholesome root of hatred 
in the consciousness, or mental-behavior.
Anger from the Vimuttimagga & Visuddhimagga:
The following is an adaptation from the Vimuttimagga22 and Visuddhimagga23 – their 
merged words related towards hatred.  There are fourteen different kinds of people mentioned 
corresponding to fourteen kinds of behavior, of which only those related to this article’s theme of 
anger or hatred is shown, for the sake of brevity:
• The person walking in hate
• The person walking in passion-hate
• The person walking in hate-infatuation
• The person walking in passion-hate-infatuation
Of the fourteen types of behavior, these four above are the types under the realm of 
walking-in-hatred.  These people always behave or exhibit some sort of hatred or anger; and often 
their hatred increases or becomes very developed. This ‘hating-behavior’ exudes several possibilities 
or variations of anger – and because not every occurrence of anger is identical, again there is 
the potentiality of the characteristics merging:
• The walker in hate and the walker in intelligence may be similar
• The walker in passion-hate and the walker in faith-intelligence may be similar
• The walker in hate-infatuation and the walker in intelligence-excogitation may be similar
• The walker in passion-hate-infatuation and the walker in faith-intelligence-excogitation 
may be similar
So, depending on the various combinations of idiosyncrasies, these can all ﬁ nd their roots 
in the hating-temperament.  How is this understood?  As the Vimuttimagga asks questions for 
the reader: How can a person walking in hate become one with walker in intelligence?  In a sense: 
How are they the same or similar?  Consider the answer: In a hating person, when he does good: 
intelligence is strong - because this quality approaches hate.  How so, because most people may 
not see the linkages?  One is able to discriminate minute-details – a form of critique that brings 
out frustrations.  One of intelligent temperament is parallel to one of hating temperament because 
understanding is strong when proﬁ table kamma occurs in one of hating temperament, owing to its 
special qualities being near those of hate.  This is not saying that hatred and intelligence are 
the same, but it is saying that both types of behavior look at the smallest increments of something; 
and thereby can distinguish volitions (preferences) more carefully to pursue proper courses of action.  
For, in a negative or unproﬁ table way, hate is also a form of alienation or disaffection and would not 
hold to its object; and so, in a proﬁ table way the behavior of understanding is likewise interpreted.  
22  Upatissa (Rev. N.R.M Ehara, and Kheminda Thera, trans.): The Path of Freedom – the Vimuttimagga (Colombo, 
1961)
23  Bhadahtacariya Buddhaghosa (Bhikkhu Nanamoli, trans.): Visuddhimagga – The Path of Puri ﬁ cation (Seattle: 
Buddhist Publication Society, Pariyatti Editions, 1999)
Anger from the Vimuttimagga & Visuddhimagga:
183
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Further, the text suggests: Hate seeks out only unreal faults, while understanding seeks out only 
real faults; and hate occurs in the mode of condemning living beings, while understanding occurs in 
the mode of condemning formations.  There are three traits that make hate and intelligence appear 
to be similar, through three concepts: 
• Non-Clinging:  a person of hate would not cleave (to what is good); likewise, intelligent people 
do not cleave (to what is bad).
• Searching For Faults:  As a hating person is given to fault ﬁ nding, so an intelligent person is 
given to the search for the faults of wrongful conduct.
• Repulsion:  As a hating person repulses others, so an intelligent person repulses the conformations. 
Through these characteristics or aspects of personality, a person walking in hate can be 
seen as similar to someone walking in intelligence. They are alike in this respect.  In else can be 
said about the hateful person, in terms of their mode of practice?  The walker in hate is of quick 
practice, because he is easily led, is strong in intelligence and because of the rarity of infatuation 
and excogitation in him.  The walker in passion-hate is of quick practice, because he is easily led, 
strong in faith and intelligence and because of the rarity of infatuation and excogitation in him.  
The walker in hate-infatuation is of slow practice, because he is led with difﬁ culty, lacks intelligence 
and because infatuation and excogitation are strong in him.  The walker in qualities of equal measure 
(passion-hate-infatuation or faith-intelligence-excogitation) is of slow practice, because he is led 
with difﬁ culty, does not dwell in intelligence and because infatuation and excogitation are strong in 
him.  Basically, human deﬁ lements can be reduced to just three: a person walks in passion (greed), 
a person walks in hate (hatred), and a person walks in infatuation (delusion).  How though, can 
someone determine that someone is of a certain personality-characteristic or behavior?  How can we 
look at someone and determine that they are either a walker in passion, hate, or infatuation?  Their 
external non-verbal actions are examined – the body language is accessed: someone is observed 
through their methods of dressing (robes), the way food is eaten, the type of bedding resided in, 
work-resort and postures.  These and other social interactions determine the characteristics. 
Deeds done in the past are causes of behavior: One who (in past existences) had engaged in such 
hostile acts as: killing, maiming and capturing, becomes a walker in hate, and also one who passes 
away from a hell or a serpent-state, is reborn here.  Thus deeds done in the past become causes of 
behavior.
• Elements as causes of behavior: because of the heightening of two elements, one becomes 
a walker in hate. They are the element of mobility and the element of heat.  
• Cardinal humors as causes of behavior: one who has an excess of choler becomes a walker in 
hate, and one who has an excess of wind becomes a walker in infatuation.  
Judging the Criteria:
Simply put: to be angry is to not be Buddhist - the person has already been infected too 
deeply by the kilesa (de ﬁ lement); but, we must study more about the phenomena of being angry 
and exuding hatred.  We can actually witness hate or anger being displayed in some people.  
Judging the Criteria:
184
Conference
How do past deeds become the causes of behavior?  How can we determine if someone is a walker in 
hate? Check the non-verbal actions of the person of contention.  There are seven aspects of behavior 
that are observed that contribute in knowing: through (the manner of seeing) objects, through 
the de ﬁ lements, through (the manner of) walking, through (the manner of) robing, through 
(the manner of) eating, through work and through (the manner of) sleeping; and one’s resort or how 
one dwells.  A person desiring a meditation subject should express three ideals: be able to dedicate 
oneself to a respected teacher; be able to sincerely ask for the meditation subject; and possess 
the ﬁ rm resolution to endure the techniques.  Someone should never undergo an improper search 
because this leads to one’s failures in meditation.  If someone remains undedicated and wanderous 
to a teacher and techniques, whimsically, consequently the teacher cannot help the seeker with even 
material things or the Dhamma, and will not engage in training the seeker in the [ abhidhammic] 
cryptic books – those dealing with meditation subjects, the four noble truths, dependent origination, 
etc., -those being profound and associated with voidness.  Failing to get this assistance, someone 
will be unable to get a good grasp of the Buddha’s dispensation – and may fall into misdeeds or 
revert back into the lay-life. The following are where unfortunate things may occur or are observed 
through non-verbal communications: 
• Through the manner of seeing objects:   When one of hating temperament sees even a slightly 
unpleasing visible object, one avoids looking long as if tired, he picks out trivial faults, discounts 
genuine virtues, and when departing, he does so without regard as if anxious to leave.  When 
facing humor, often quarrels with the others. The walker-in-hate is not pleased with very good 
things; and rejects just about anything.  One’s way of life is quite determined by the humors; and 
with the other sense-objects similar behavior emerges.   The cultivation of the forest-dweller’s 
practice and the tree-root-dweller’s practice here are suitable for one of hating temperament: 
for hate too subsides in one who dwells there without coming into con ﬂ ict.24 Thus it may be 
known that one is a walker in hate – seen through observing or known ‘through (the manner of 
seeing) objects’.  
• Through the de ﬁ lements:  There are ﬁ ve types of deﬁ lements for one walking in hate: anger, 
vindictiveness, hypocrisy, stinginess, hatred.  One of hating temperament has formerly had 
plenty of stabbing and torturing and brutal work to do or has reappeared here after dying in one 
of the hells or the naga-serpent existences - there is no de ﬁ nitive deﬁ nition.  For when in one 
man, at the moment of his accumulating rebirth producing kamma, if hate is strong within him, 
and the other characteristics (greed, delusion) are weak, then this will be the reason why, on 
being reborn through rebirth-linking given by that kamma, he is angry.  When at the moment 
of his accumulating kamma [for instance]: non-greed, hate and delusion are strong and 
the others are weak, then in the way already stated he has little de ﬁ lement and is unshakable 
even on seeing a heavenly object, but he has hate and is slow in understanding.  Likewise, when 
at the moment of his accumulating kamma, non-greed, hate and non-delusion are strong and 
the rest weak, then in the way already stated he both has no greed and possesses understanding, 
but has hate and is irascible.  So it is the kamma productive of rebirth-linking and accompanied 
by some temperament that should be understood as the source of the temperament – and this 
hatred can be either keen (if unprompted) or sluggish (if prompted).  A person is known by this 
temperament through one’s posture, actions, method of eating, seeing things, and so on, and 
by the states occurring – thereby the teacher can recognize the pupil’s temperament.  In one of 
24  Bhadahtacariya Buddhaghosa (Bhikkhu Nanamoli, trans.): Visuddhimagga – The Path of Puri ﬁ cation (Seattle: 
Buddhist Publication Society, Pariyatti Editions, 1999), II 86
185
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
hating temperament there is frequent occurrences of such states as: anger, enmity, disparaging, 
domineering, envy, and avarice. Thus it may be known, ‘through the deﬁ lements’.  
• Through the manner of walking:   The natural gait of one walking in hate is thus: one lifts up 
the feet jerkily or digs with the points of the feet; and jerkily puts them down or puts the feet 
down quickly, lifts one up quickly, and drags the steps along.  The feet rub against each other 
when they are placed down half-way, as if digging the ground.  This is how the one who walks 
in hate is known – through this sort of walking.  
• Through the manner of robing:   The natural manner of robing of him who walks in hate is 
thus: He robes hurriedly. The robes are too tight and sit too high, are not level or well-rounded, 
are inelegantly worn and, in many ways, are not pleasing to see – although it is said that 
the right kind of inner and outer garments for him are of any superior stuff such as China cloth, 
Somara cloth, silk, ﬁ ne cotton, ﬁ ne linen, of either single or double thickness, quite light, and 
well-dyed, quite pure in color to beﬁ t an ascetic.  Therefore, a walker in hate should robe himself 
with minute care, cleanly and with robes of bright color. His robes should sit low and be elegant. 
• Through the manner of eating:   A walker in hate is displeased with food of little taste.   
The right kind of gruel, rice and hard-food has color, smell and taste, possesses nutritive essence, 
and is inviting, superior in every way, and enough for his wants.  One of hating temperament also 
relishes eating rough, sour or acidic food, and takes in big mouthfuls of immoderate lumps of 
food, not well-rounded. When eating he makes a lump that ﬁ lls his mouth and he eats hurriedly 
without savoring the tastes.  He is aggrieved when he gets something not good.  A walker in 
hate may look for succulent, pure and tasty food, and for as much as he likes.  Thus it may be 
known, ‘through (the manner of) eating’.
• Through work:   A walker in hate hurriedly takes the broom, grasps it tightly and sweeps, 
quickly, one end to the other, scattering or throwing up sand uncleanly and unevenly on both 
sides - making harsh noise.  He sweeps clean, but not evenly.  A walker in hate does all things 
unevenly, but does not let his mind go astray.  Thus it may be known ‘through work’.   
• Through the manner of sleeping:   A walker in hate hurries and lies down or spreads his 
bed hastily in any place he gets.   When ready, one then ﬂ ings the body down and sleeps with 
a scowl – frowning in sleep.  On being awakened at night, he gets up immediately and answers 
angrily or as if annoyed.  A walker in hate should sleep and sit under shade of trees, by the water’s 
edge, in a level place, in a completed shrine, or in a place provided with beds and sheets.  Thus 
it may be known ‘through (the manner of) sleeping’.  
• Through one’s resort or dwelling:  The resort of a walker in hate is the place where rice, water, 
meat and drink are complete: a suitable resting place for one of hating temperament is not too 
high or low, provided with shade and water, with well-proportioned walls, posts and steps, with 
well-prepared frieze work and lattice work, brightened with various kinds of paintings, with 
an even, smooth, soft ﬂ oor, adorned with festoons of ﬂ owers and a canopy of many-colored cloth 
like a Brahma-god’s divine palace, with bed and chair covered with well-spread clean pretty 
covers, smelling sweetly of ﬂ owers, and perfumes and scents set about for homely comfort, 
which makes one happy and glad at the mere sight of it.  A hating man gains faith through being 
bound up with unlovely things. The right kind of road to his lodging is free from any sort of 
186
Conference
danger, traverses clean, even ground, and has been properly prepared.  It is best that the lodging’s 
furnishings are not too many in order to avoid hiding places for insects, bugs, snakes, and 
rats; even a single bed and chair only.  When he enters the village for alms, he should not face 
the sun, and should go where there are many men of faith. To such a place he should go. The right 
kind of bowl for him is made of iron and is well-shaped like a water-bubble, as polished as 
a gem, spotless and of quite pure color to be ﬁ t an ascetic.  The right kind of road on which to 
wander for alms is free from dangers, level, agreeable, with the village neither too far nor too 
near.  The right kind of village in which to wander for alms is where people, thinking: ‘Now, our 
lord is coming’, prepare a seat in a sprinkled, swept place, and going out to meet him, take his 
bowl and lead him to the house, seat him on a prepared seat, and serve him carefully with their 
own hands.  Suitable people serving him are handsome, pleasing, well-bathed, well-anointed, 
scented with the perfume or incense and the smell of ﬂ owers, adorned with apparel made of 
variously-dyed clean pretty cloth, who do their work carefully.  The walker in hate should 
adopt the posture of sitting or lying down.  A hating man is much affected by the humors, and 
does not allow himself to be stained by the deﬁ lements.  A man walking in hate is quarrelsome.  
A hating man is like a master.
Preferred Meditation:
It is no surprise that there are few actual directions for recognizing the temperaments that have 
been handed down in their entirety in either the texts or the commentaries; they are only expressed 
according to the opinion of the teachers and cannot therefore be treated as authentic.  Most of these 
concepts are just based from observations – and many of these observations can be reassessed.  
As we know people can hide their emotions… someone could indeed be angry, but act otherwise 
– thus, much of the above can be dismissed.  It’s quite possible for those of a hating temperament, 
when they diligently aspire to alter their emotions, to have other characteristics ascribed upon 
them.  Only such directions for recognizing temperament as are given in the commentaries should 
be treated as authentic, for it was said: ‘ A teacher who has acquired penetration of minds will know 
the temperament and will explain a meditation subject accordingly; one who has not should question 
the pupil’.  So it is by penetration of the minds or by questioning the person, that it can be known 
whether he is one of any sort of temperament.  
However, the meditation subject that is suitable to the temperament has not been cleared 
up in all its aspects yet.  This will become clear automatically when those in the following lists 
are treated in detail.  Now it was said above: ‘and he should apprehend from among the forty 
meditation subjects one that suits his own temperament’.  Despite illustrating self-prognosis, there 
is no teacher prescribing a meditation topic if this is taken as given.  How ‘by way of person’?  
A walker in hate should not practice the ten perceptions of putrescence, because of the arising of 
resentment-perception. A walker in hate is not good at appreciating it and is comparable to a man 
with a bilious ailment partaking of hot drinks and food which are harmful to him.  The four divine 
abidings and four color kasinas are eight suitable meditations for one of hating temperament.  
A walker in hate could practice the four immeasurables (suitable for any temperament), because these 
help overcome hatred; or again, the undertaking of practicing color kasinas, because his mind attends 
to such.  And again, there is another teaching: “When I investigate the subjects of meditation, I see 
their distinctive qualities.  If that be so, will there be difﬁ culties at the beginning?  A walker in hate 
Preferred Meditation:
187
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
who has dull faculties should practice the four immeasurables. By this he will be able to overcome 
hatred.  The walker in hate who has keen faculties, being one endowed with wisdom, should 
practice the (meditation of the) special sphere. Thus should one practice and dispel hatred.  Therefore, 
there should be no difﬁ culty. According to this teaching, the kasinas and mindfulness of respiration 
are developed (further) through space.  It is said, according to the Visuddhimagga (p. 114) that in 
the Anguttara-Nikaya’s Meghiya Sutta (AN, IV , 358): “One should in addition develop these four 
things: foulness should be developed for the purpose of abandoning greed (lust); loving-kindness 
should be developed for the purpose of abandoning ill-will; mindfulness of breathing should be 
developed for the purpose of cutting off applied thought; perception of impermanence should be 
cultivated for the purpose of eliminating the conceit: ‘I am.’”  The Visuddhimagga also suggests 
that in the Majjhima-Nikaya’s Rahula Sutta, there is advice stating that seven mediation subjects 
are suitable for any single temperament.  So, instead of insisting on the mere letter, the intention 
should be sought in each instance – by way of asking some basic questions:
• What is your temperament?
• What do you like bringing to mind?
• What meditation subject does your mind favor?
The student can be tested through the following questions:
• Ask them to recite the learned meditation in one or two sessions
• Ask them to expound on it to one who lives in the same place each time he comes
• Suggest to one who wants to learn it to then go elsewhere to expound on it in such 
a manner as to be not too brief nor too long
If someone is demonstrating the kasinas, there are nine aspects that cannot be forgotten: 
1. Four faults of the kasina
2. The making of the kasina
3. The method of development for one who has made it
4. The two kinds of signs
5. The two kinds of concentration
6. The seven kinds of suitable and unsuitable, 
7. The ten kinds of absorption
8. Evenness of energy
9. Directions for absorption
For any of the other meditation subjects, each one should be expounded appropriately according to 
what the method would dictate.  When the meditation subject is being expounded by the teacher, 
the student-meditator must apprehend the sign as he listens to the instructions.  To apprehend 
the sign – this means that he must connect each aspect, systematically, which means also that 
instruction should include notions of these: 
188
Conference
• This is the preceding clause
• This is the subsequent clause
• This is its meaning
• This is its intention
• This is the simile
If the student can listen attentively, apprehending the sign in this way, then the meditation-
topic is well-apprehended; then, because of that, one can gain or recognize the distinctions - but not 
until these have been re ﬁ ned.  All of these items should annotated and recognized with ease – or 
repeated until known.  If the meditator is endowed with any merit, one should have no difﬁ culty in 
fulﬁ lling these subjects of meditation.
Non-Violent Communication and Domestic Respect:
The Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan gave a speech recently25, and discussed: 
words have the power to kill or destroy the spirit of love, and lessen the self-respect of an individual 
through these intimate levels of violence.  Have you ever told your children that they are stupid, 
and will never amount to anything, and that they are just like their good-for-nothing father?  
The conditioned-mind begins to absorb this negativity and adapts to or internalizes these issues, 
until the person actually becomes what was created.  The person issuing the words is responsible 
for creating the young person to be raised negatively.  Men and women need to learn their purposes 
to act and bring about peace and joy in the house – but, if the man and woman do not know their 
domestic role, problems ensue.  When men are under-performing in terms of economics, the wife 
may begin to seek outside the home for her satisfaction – and this is the catalyst for domestic 
violence – not the woman becoming adulterous, but the man failing to properly support the family.  
The issues related to domestic strife are not about sex, or the performance of sexual endeavors; 
the issue is deeply: the role of the man in a relationship.  Men are supposed to be producers, not only 
bringing material items into the home - but also provide emotional and mental security for the family.  
How someone uses their mouth is very important in a relationship and simple forms of mental 
violence, like calling people by certain curse-words, can have a devastating effect inside the home.  
We often get angry at some instigation.  “The proclivities towards lust, anger and 
conceit are more like ‘sleeping passions’ that may wake up due to certain triggers and invade us in 
a quick impulsive manner.”26  While most discussions on anger seem to pertain only to when it 
arises in meditation, Thich Nhat Hahn has suggested: hold your anger like holding a baby; because 
loving-kindness and anger are both parts of us.  Anger is a form of energy, and mindfulness is 
another form of energy.  So when the anger-energy is there, we should also invite loving-kindness 
to be present.  His solution is mindful-breathing.  Anger cannot be ignored, but when one is mindful 
of anger, then one is taking care of the anger – the practice and embracing of anger through 
25  Louis Farrakhan: The State of the Black Family – speech delivered at Thornton High School, on 20 June 2009.   
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=or0lxAiCRBg&feature=player_embedded - Accessed on 14 June 2011.
26  Padmasiri de Silva: Buddhist and Freudian Psychology (Victoria: Shogam Publications, 4 th Edition, 2010), p. xxxiii 
(Prelude)
Non-Violent Communication and Domestic Respect:
189
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
mindfulness, and after time there will be a transformation of the person.27  The energy of anger can 
be transformed into the energy of understanding, if we learn to comprehend this process.  But again, 
most of this activity seems to take place in meditation.
Professor De Silva states: “In dhammanupassanā, the meditator makes the anger an object 
of meditation; in cittanupassanā, like in mindfulness-based cognitive therapy the meditator becomes 
aware of the though components and the auto-pilot process that feeds anger; in vedan ānupassanā, 
one ‘puts on the brakes’ at the initial emergence of disagreeable feelings (dukkha-vedan ā) and 
does not let it develop into anger.  In tranquility meditation, the development of a state of bodily 
and mental calm may temporarily push the anger aside, but it may not radically deal with its roots.  
In kāyanupassanā, which is focused on the body and is the preliminary meditation in the Buddhist 
fourfold scheme (satipaṭṭhana), we develop attention towards a very central ingredient of negative 
emotions and body-reactivity.  In this context, tranquility meditation too can be effective.  In 
the last analysis, it is necessary to have in mind that Buddhism has no generic term for emotion, and 
it is an initial feeling (vedana) that becomes an emotion.  And as such, an emotion is a construction 
composed of an initial bodily/mental feeling which is pleasurable/painful/neutral and which, by 
the addition of thoughts, appraisals, desires/craving, grasping, and physiological arousal gets 
converted to an emotion.”
Professor Deborah Bowman has written: “The ability of the non-violent communication 
practitioner to clearly observe a situation is essential.  Often in the practice it is necessary to translate 
this observation into a verbal description that is without judgment or personal prejudice.  …A key to 
being received and understood by another person in a potentially conﬂ ictual situation is to provide 
information that is without personal bias, interpretation or evaluation.  …We might say: ‘I noticed 
you just now raised your voice louder than usual and I am wondering if you are feeling angry?’ – 
instead of: ‘you are so angry.’  …our purpose is not to change people in order to get our way.”28
A Diffi  cult Solution:
It is very difﬁ cult to maintain composure when someone is in your face yelling at you for 
something you allegedly conducted or neglected to perform.  Some people are quite persistent in their 
rants.  Through Attila the Hun, one of Western History’s most relentless individuals is recollected, 
along with a discussion pertaining to many modern social situations which serve as the catalyst for 
the arising of anger.  Contemporary music, such as RZA’s song on Domestic Violence can actually 
serve as a public-service announcement for the prevention of such horrible activities.  Not only 
are people conscious about refraining from spousal and child-abuse, they are also conscious to not 
generate stress-levels that would induce a herpes-outbreak – a transformation that the Buddha had 
indeed labeled as the anger person becoming ugly, literally.  Several pages were also dedicated to 
the types of body-actions or the analysis of someone’s non-verbal communications – demonstrations 
of their behavior which can be observed from a distance.  The Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan 
has urged families to adopt a language of respect and nourishment which comes to fruitation when 
the roles of each family-member is well-played out, and Dr. Deborah Bowman has suggested that 
27  Ram Dass interviews Thich Nhat Hanh - http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tZKrl5n79hY – accessed on 14 June 2011
28  Deborah Bowman: Buddhism and Nonviolent Communication: An Effective Practice for Peace, inside Buddhist 
Approach to Political Conﬂ ict and Peace Development (Dr. Dion Peoples, ed.) – delivered for the 6th United Nations Day 
of Vesak Conference, 4-6 May 2009, pp. 132-144
A Diffi  cult Solution :
190
Conference
non-violent communication is a key factor in better relationships, which was also a theme issued 
forth in the Farrakhan video.  The material taken from the Buddhist texts deal with anger primarily 
through meditation, while the Venerable Thich Nhat Hanh has tried to show that while being 
mindful, one can control oneself in awakened-active moments, through mindfulness.  What then is 
the closing words by the author, in his own voice?  
My Conclusion for the Prevention of Domestic Violence and 
Anger Management:
I cannot say that I will never again become angry; it is likely that anger will occur within 
myself in the future.  I do take measures to control my anger.  I have taken the proactive  measure 
of avoidance as a great method.  Yet, I can only take upon the circumstances as they occur, because 
each encounter seems to be different than any previous situations.  There are perhaps millions of 
Americans living with post-traumatic stress-syndrome, where they are forced to live paranoid or 
hyper-reactive lives, fearing something, to disassociate themselves from the catalyst of some anger 
or hatred.  Buddhism offers many coping mechanisms for those suffering with aggressive-behavior.  
Mindfulness, not only in meditation, but mindful living is also a great protector of the individual – 
performing as the security force for the susceptible.  People can learn to recognize that they are prone 
to this deﬁ ling characteristic; they should endure peacefully within a troublesome situation; and by 
controlling one’s anger one can become the victor in the circumstance.29 In this way, mindfulness 
becomes a continuous practice rather than just a mere device utilized temporarily in meditations.  
Rather than making anger an object of re ﬂ ection, in the sense that meditators use, anger 
should be perhaps brought out into the social-sphere – and in doing such, perhaps a greater process 
of civility begins to cover society.  We should know that anger pervades everywhere.  Sometimes, 
I think it is better so see things negatively, because when something bad happens you are not 
surprised by it; but if you wander around thinking everything is ﬁ ne – someone might be in for 
a rude awakening.  In this way, someone can learn to appreciate the ﬁ ne and simple things, and 
learn to value things at a deeper level.  This includes our relationships.  If we know that the world is 
full of bad people, hostility and anger, we can associate this with suffering pervading in the world.  
Since we are in the world, we must operate in this realm where suffering exists, even if it is not our 
own or of ourselves, we might be the victim or witness of someone else’s hostility.  The more we 
are ready for it, the better we can arm ourselves or have at our disposal: the proper tools to assist 
in the elimination of anger, which we have already recognized, and are thereby taking measures to 
eliminate it, because we know goodness or betterment will come.  
29  D. Eckstein & D. Mitchell: Incorporating Buddhist Psychology into a brief group theraopy for Anger and Agression 
(International Journal of Academic Research, V ol. I, No. 2, November 2009) - http://www.ijar.lit.az/pdf/2/2009(2-30).
pdf – accessed on 16 June 2011
My Conclusion for the Prevention of Domestic Violence and 
Anger Management:
191
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Bibliography:
Barbara R. Wright: Metta - The Map, The Formula, The Equations (USA: Metta Press, 2009
Bhadahtacariya Buddhaghosa (Bhikkhu Nanamoli, trans.): Visuddhimagga – The Path of 
Puriﬁ cation (Seattle: Buddhist Publication Society, Pariyatti Editions, 1999)
Bhikkhu Bodhi: The Connected Discourses of the Buddha – A New Translation of the Samyutta 
Nikaya, V ol. I (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2000)
Charles C. Mierow (trans.) The Origin and Deeds of the Goths, by Jordanes (Princeton: 
Princeton University, 1908), Section XXXIX:  http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/
epub/14809/pg14809.html - accessed on 30 April 2011
D. Eckstein & D. Mitchell: Incorporating Buddhist Psychology into a brief group theraopy for 
Anger and Agression (International Journal of Academic Research, V ol. I, No. 2, 
November 2009) - http://www.ijar.lit.az/pdf/2/2009(2-30).pdf – accessed on 16 June 2011
E. Hardy (ed.): The Aṅguttara-Nikāya, Part IV (London: Pali Text Society, 1979)
E. M. Hare: The Book of the Gradual Sayings (Anguttara Nik āya), V ol. IV (London: Pāli Text 
Society, 1965) 
Hatebreed: To the Threshold (ofﬁ cial video): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKZZHHyNz6I – 
accessed on 26 April 2011.
His Holiness Prince Vajirañ āṇa: A Special Auspicious Allocation (Bangkok: Mahamakut 
University Press, 1995), p. 50
http://ptsd.about.com/od/ptsdandthemilitary/a/Iraq_anger.htm - accessed on 15 June 2011
http://www.angermanagementresource.com/anger-test.html - accessed on 15 June 2011
http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/va/gerlock.htm - accessed on 15 June 2011
Maurits Kwee & T.L. Holdstock (Eds.): Western & Buddhist Psychology: Clinical Perspectives 
(Delft: Eburon Publishers, 1996)
Maurits Kwee (Ed.): Psychotherapy, Meditation & Health: A Cognitive-Behavioral Perspective 
(London: East-West Publications, 1990)
Maurits Kwee: New Horizons in Buddhist Psychology: Relational Buddhism for Collaborative 
Practitioners (Chagrin Falls: Taos Institute Publications, 2010)
Padmasiri de Silva: An Introduction to Mindfulness-Based Counseling (Ratmalana: Vishva Lekha 
Printers, 2008)
Padmasiri de Silva: Buddhist and Freudian Psychology (Victoria: Shogam Publications, 4th Edi-
tion, 2010)
Bibliography:
192
Conference
Pasuk Phongpaichit & Chris Baker: Thailand: Economy and Politics (Kuala Lampur: Oxford 
University Press, 2000), pp. 11-12
RZA: Domestic Violence ( ﬁ lm): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KISU66F_IIM – accessed 
on 26 April 2011
RZA: Domestic Violence (music video): http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A4bu_6yUg4Y – 
accessed on 26 April 2011
Upatissa (Rev. N.R.M Ehara, and Kheminda Thera, trans.): The Path of Freedom – the Vimuttimagga 
(Colombo, 1961)
W.H.D. Rouse (E.B. Cowell, ed), The Jataka or Stories of the Buddha’s Former Births (Oxford: Pali 
Text Society, 2004)
193
Psychotherapy By Karma Transformation
Maurits G.T. Kwee1
Prelude 
There are plenty misunderstandings about karma whose conceptualization in non-Buddhist 
quarters carries the ﬂ avor of fate or destiny due to the working mechanism of cause-and-effect. This 
usually boils down to: “good deeds lead to heaven, an after-life paradise, and bad deeds lead to hell 
in the beyond”. The Buddha allocated from his awakening point-of-view a speci ﬁ c this-worldly/
here-now meaning of karma, a term borrowed from Brahmanism, as intentional action that is subject 
to choice. Furthermore, from a Buddhist psychological perspective heaven and hell are metaphors 
for joy and anger, while good and evil only exist as non-foundational qualities which are basically 
empty. This essay draws on the tenet that the Buddha was an “analyst”/vibhajjavadin (Subha Sutta)2
and that his transforming dialogues were meant to change intention/ kamma, motivation/hetu, and 
performance/kiriya. In order to contribute to the daily psychological “rebirths” of wholesome 
emotional episodes, the Buddha’s tactics of transforming kamma can be summarized in a centerpiece 
called Karma Sequence, which is a combination of the modalities/ khandhas and the 3-Poisons: 
(1) awareness of sensory perception (seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, tasting, and viewing through 
the mind’s eye) which are felt relatively positive, negative, or neutral, (2) awareness of dys/functional 
cognitions due to ignorance on how the mind works which usually fabricates projections of illusory 
selves and delusional gods, (3) awareness of un/wholesome cognitions of intentional planning also 
called volition or conation which inhere in the motivational factors of action, (4) awareness of 
self-sabotaging thoughts which reﬂ ect the proclivity of irrational craving (“musts/shoulds”), greedy 
grasping (fear-of-loss and grief-of-loss), and hateful clinging (aggression/other-hate and depression/
self-hate), and (5) awareness by mindfulness unveiling the interactive Dependent Origination of 
body/speech/mind which incorporate karmic antecedents and consequents leading to balanced 
interactivity. In effect, Karma Transformation starts with an unwanted emotional state and works at 
changing unwholesome/akusala perception, cognition, and behavior with regard to an external or 
internal activating event by choosing for wholesome/kusala perception, cognition, and behavior to 
alter affect. Thus, the karma of drama, distress, and agony is transformed into the karma of contentment. 
This is illustrated by a case example detailing the construction of wholesome karma as rational 
cognitions and functional behaviors. Insiders have observed that karmic sequences  run parallel to 
the centerpiece used in Cognitive-Behavior Therapy (CBT), a school of psychotherapy, which im-
plies that the two methodologies of change overlap considerably. Indeed, one of the founding fathers 
of CBT, the legendary Albert Ellis, noted that these disciplines bear more commonalities than 
differences, particularly by abolishing “most of the human ego” (Kwee & Ellis, 1998). Psychotherapy, 
also if Buddhist, operates in the realm of the “provisional self”; hence therapy logistically precedes 
meditation towards “ultimate no-self”. At bottom: only when calmed down, free from emotional 
quagmires and horror vacuum, is one ready to shift toward emptiness and Buddhahood.
1  M.G.T. Kwee, Ph.D. (Em. Hon. Prof.), Faculty Member of the Taos Institute (USA) – Tilburg University (Netherlands) 
PhD-Program and Founder of the Institute for Relational Buddhism. E: mauritskwee@gmail.com ; W: www.relational-
budhism.org; www.taosinstitute.net/maurits-gt-kwee-phd1; Facebook: Relational Buddhism; twitter @relationalbuddh.
2  Thanks are due to Dr. Dion Peoples who pro ﬁ ciently brought the correct sutta to my attention.
Prelude 
194
Conference
Introduction
There is a growing interest worldwide amongst scientists-practitioners for the Buddhist 
Teachings (Buddha-Dhamma/Dharma) as an applied science of psychology to guide people’s ways 
of living toward emotional balance (e.g. De Silva, 2010; Kwee, 2010 and 2011, Kwee, Gergen, & 
Koshikawa, 2006). This is in spite of the fact that the Dharma is considered by many, Buddhists and 
non-Buddhists alike, to be a religion and a philosophy rather than a psychology. However, because 
these three words/concepts do not exist in the pristine Dharma and in the languages of Buddhist Asia, 
it is neither of these three. Because Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha – who lived around 563-483 
Before Common Era – never claimed to be some intermediary between humanity and the beyond, 
a messiah or a prophet, or anything else but a human being, who claimed to be just “awakened”, i.e. 
not asleep (Dona Sutta), the Dharma is deﬁ nitely not a religion in the Abrahamic sense.  
Moreover, as in the discourses ( nikayas), one might infer that the Buddha promulgated 
a this-worldly teaching of wisdom that is non-theistic implying that the Dharma is “neither theistic, 
nor a-theistic” ( Sabba Sutta, Vacchagotta Sutta,  and Malunkyaputta Sutta ). In the Tevijja Sutta 
the Buddha pointed out that it is foolish to assimilate with an imaginary or visualized god. In effect 
this boils down to the reading that “god is non-of-our-business”. Nonetheless, the Dharma was and 
is usually categorized as a “religion”. Even if termed a “secular religion” this classi ﬁ cation is 
a consequence of Eurocentric/neo-colonial thinking. However, from a pragmatic point of view, there 
are advantages to treat the Dharma as a religion, because then it is: (1) recognizable, (2) organizable, 
(3) subsidizable, and (4) viable in multicultural societies.3 Hence, on the bottom line, radically resisting 
the erroneous view of the Dharma as a religion becomes questionable. But Buddhists know better: 
our teaching is about disseminating loving-kindness against the backdrop of an emptiness of the wise. 
God-heads merged with the Dharma are cultural atavisms meant to attract the illiterate and not 
to scare off the meek by an “empty teaching”. In certain psychological quarters it is not at all 
praiseworthy to consider the Dharma as a religion. To the renowned Sigmund Freud (1927) religion 
is a collective obsessive-compulsive disorder due to an infantile wish for a parent which is much akin 
to a psychotic disturbance; and the legendary Albert Ellis (1980) straightforwardly called religion 
mental illness. As both giants are of Jewish descent they alluded to the Abrahamic faiths when talking 
about religion.   
While the interpretation of the Dharma as a religion was in the tradition of Louis de Vallée 
Poussin (1869-1939), a Belgian who explored Indian Mahayana that includes god-like interpretations 
through its representations of cosmic Buddhas meant as “skilful means” (upayakaushalya, S), there 
was another tradition that views the Dharma as a philosophy. This current was spearheaded by the 
Russian scholar Fyodor Stcherbatsky (1866-1942) who explored Tibetan Buddhism as a philosophy. 
The term Buddhism is exemplary to denote the philosophical take. Notwithstanding, the Dharma is 
a magga, a way or practice (comparable to the Tao in China), not an “ism”; hence it is not a philosophy, 
nor a theory, but a guide for practice. Hence, rather than “opium for the intellectuals”, the Dharma 
is a modus vivendi for seekers of liberation from experiential malaise by tailored experimentation 
called meditation. If the Dharma is not a philosophy, should this Western word, enforcing misguided 
semantics, be banned from the Buddhist vocabulary? 
3  E.g., if not as a religion, the Dharma would be unclassi ﬁ able and unviable in Indonesia. By declaring 
the Adhi-Buddha as a god-head, Buddhism enjoys the status of a formal religion in the framework of religious freedom. 
Introduction
195
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
As long as the user knows better, using Buddhism as a container term that includes reli-
gion and philosophy is surely convenient. This implies that Buddhism could also be a psychology 
(De Silva, 2005; Kalupahana, 1987). However, because psychology is a typical Western discipline, 
it is for clarity reasons advisable to explicitly talk about Buddhist Psychology to acknowledge 
the conﬂ uence of the Dharma and psychology. According to the American Psychological Association 
(APA) psychology is “the study of the mind and behavior. The discipline embraces all aspects of 
the human experience, from the functions of the brain to the actions of nations, from child development 
to care for the aged. In every conceivable setting from scienti ﬁ c research centers to mental health 
care services, ‘the understanding of behavior’ is the enterprise of psychologists” (www.apa.org).
Psychologists/psychotherapists are scientists-practitioners who attempt to understand mind, 
experience, and concomitant behaviors; these are themes overlapping the Buddhist venture. 
The Buddhist project is to responsibly watch over kamma/P or karma/S which can be de ﬁ ned in 
psychological terms as: intentional/cognitive activity/behavior in relational context. How does karma
come about? Which factors are functional in contributing to its multi-causal (body/speech/mind) 
and multimodal (doing/talking/thinking) arising, peaking, subsiding, and ceasing? What remedy is 
prescribed to alleviate people from the dukkha of psychological suffering? Which interventions need 
to be implemented for what ailments, to whom, by whom, when, and under which circumstances? 4
William James, father of American psychology, already noted: “I am ignorant of Buddhism... [but] 
as I apprehend the Buddhist…  karma, I agree in principle with that.” (1902, p.512). In this essay, 
I follow his lead.
Karma and Its Metaphors
A Buddhist approach considers meaning as derived from the compassion and care for 
interpersonal relationship in harmony with oneself. This stretches out to Buddhist Psychotherapy 
that could be pinpointed as an evidence-based system of assessment and intervention. To date, 
the school of psychotherapy that is researched best is Cognitive-Behavior Therapy (CBT) which is 
an amalgam of Behavior Therapy and Cognitive Therapy; both began in the 1950s. 
Behavior Therapy is based on a model derived from the psychology of learning by conditioning: 
(1) Pavlovian classical conditioning (food associated to a ringing bell will eventually result in salivation 
when only hearing the sound), (2) Skinnerian operant conditioning (rewarding a target behavior 
will result in its frequency increase), and (3) Bandura’s vicarious conditioning which is cognitive 
learning through modeling and imitation. Cognitive Therapy targets the analysis of dysfunctional 
or irrational thoughts, cognitions-concepts/images-visualizations which are highly correlated to 
4  Research (Lyubomirsky, 2008) suggests that un/happiness is determined by a genetic set-point (50%), circumstantial 
factors (10%), and intentional activity (40%), called karma in Buddhism. The latter opens a window of opportunity. 
Human beings are equipped by a personal genetic set-point for un/happiness comparable with a set-point for weight 
or length which is hardly modi ﬁ able. People with high set-points will ﬁ nd it easier to be happy, while people with low 
set-points will have to work harder to achieve and maintain happiness under similar conditions. Long term overall 
circumstances include correlational demographics happening to us like age, health, education, money, country, religion, or 
marital status. While these factors matter, they only determine a small percentage to un/happiness. Due to human hedonic 
adaptation, it is a misguided hope that they will impact long-lasting happiness. Rapidly accustomed to sensory or physiologic 
changes, they deliver short-lived boosts of happiness. Happy people do not just sit around being happy. They make things 
happen and this activity spins off a by-product which is happiness over and above the genetic set range and life circumstances. 
Karma and Its Metaphors
196
Conference
affect-emotion and individual/interpersonal manifest behavior. Affect 5 is the psychologist term 
for emotions which form the prime target of CBT that is mainly focused on alleviating suffering 
from anxiety/fear, anger/aggression, sadness/grief, and clinical depression. There are two schools 
of CBT, Beck’s Cognitive Therapy and Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy (REBT) founded by 
the legendary Albert Ellis (1913-2007). According to a survey of 800 counseling and clinical 
psychologists, members of the APA (Smith, 1982), a more recent one is not available, Beck and 
Ellis were the seventh and second in the ranking of most in ﬂ uential psychotherapist. This author 
has worked closely with Ellis on ferreting out commonalities and differences between REBT and 
Zen (Kwee & Ellis, 1998) and was one of the ﬁ rst to connect CBT with Buddhism, along with P. de Silva 
(1984) and W. Mikulas (1978) (Kwee, 1990). 
This was the formative beginning of a development that has lead to a con ﬂ uence of CBT 
and Buddhist practice for which I have coined the phrase: Psychotherapy by Karma Transformation
(Kwee & Kwee-Taams, 2010a and 2010b). Karma Transformation targets karma plainly deﬁ ned as 
(motivated) action. This deﬁ nition is blurred by supernatural notions, an unfortunate development 
that will be avoided here; Buddhist Psychotherapy is interested in this-worldly karmic sequences. 
These sequences function according to “Dependent Origination” (paticcasamuppada), the summum 
bonum of the Buddha’s awakening. Understanding karma, a proposition that intentions implicate 
activity and its fruits ( karmaphala) is quintessential in the Buddhist practice to end suffering. In 
effect, intention is a mental state of heart/thought ( Cetana Sutta) which leads to karmic action of 
body/speech/mind through volition and intention. “Intention… [I say] is kamma.” (Nibbedhika Sutta). 
The importance of karma can be inferred by the Buddha’s further statements that karma is imbibed: 
we own, are born of, relate to, and live by karma, and whatever karma we create, unwholesome 
or wholesome, that will be “inherited” (Upajjhatthana Sutta). Moreover, the Middle Way6 is also 
known by its essential dealings with “capricious” karma: (1) kammavada (the application of wholesome 
karma), (2) hetuvada (the analysis of karma‘s motivation, causation, and function, and (3) kiriyavada 
(the effect or “seed to fruit” performance result of karma). Hence, the Buddha was also known as 
a kammavadin, hetuvadin, and kiriyavadin. Even though it can be read about in various discourses 
(e.g. Mahanidana Sutta, Kammavada Bhumija Sutta, Maha- and Culla-kammavibhanga Suttas ), 
as yet, a crystal-clear, systematic, and unequivocal interpretation of karma is scarce. It is however 
a pan-Buddhist given that “absolute predestination” is anathema in a Buddhism without godheads 
(Kalupahana, 2010). 
The following is an attempt to offer an unambiguous psychological interpretation of Dependent 
Origination and the vicissitudes of karma, which is secular and this-worldly. Analyzing the Buddha’s 
wondrous instances of teaching, the observation stands out that he frequently made proﬁ ciently use 
5  Affect can be any inner short and long term feeling, from weak moods to strong emotions with a positive, negative, 
or neutral quality. 
6  The Middle Way avoids the extremes of asceticism and hedonism and the 8-Fold Practice conveys how to balance and 
comprehend it. It is deﬁ nitely not creatorism (issaranimmanavada), nor nihilism (ucchedavada) or fatalism (pubbekata-
hetuvada). As Dhamapalla stated (Maha Bodhi Journal, vol. 34, 1926), there is a host of names denoting the Dhamma: 
Sambodhiyana, Dhammayana, Jhanayoga, Ditthijala, Attajala, Brahmajala, Brahmayana, Vibhajjavada Samukkansad
hamma, Vimuttinanadassana, Ariyamagga, Ariyadhamma, and Bodhipakkhiyadhamma, which are not translated due to space 
constraints. Most importantly, the Dhamma is also known as kammavada, hetuvada, and kiryavada, and the Buddha as 
an analyst (vibhajjavadin) of intentional action (kamma), motivational factors (hetu), and performance efﬁ cacy (kiriya). 
In the framework of Dependent Origination the kammavadin is a collaborative practitioner who puts wholesome karma
in place while extinguishing unwholesome karma. This requires viriyavada, the tenet that necessitates “human effort” in 
skillfully pursuing wholesomeness (www.ucalgary.ca/numatachair/ﬁ les/numatachair/Karunadasa_2001.pdf). 
197
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
of “psychological metaphors” and “double entendres”. A case in point is his dialogue with the “ﬁ nger 
necklace serial killer”, who, surprised to see a fearless ascetic passing his notorious residence, stopped 
and yelled at the Buddha “to stop or otherwise…” whereupon the Buddha, while continuing his walk, 
replied that he had stopped already and retorted: “don’t you want to stop?” Hearing this, the bandit 
was puzzled, because he was asked to stop while he was not walking and because the ascetic said he 
has stopped while he is still walking (Angulimala Sutta). Obviously, the Buddha was juggling with 
semantics as his use of “stopping” carries the double meaning of stopping to walk and stopping to kill. 
The thesis submitted here is that the Buddha was a “semantic artist” or “poetic activist”. He showed 
that terms can be interpreted as psychological metaphors, particularly when terms are borrowed from 
Brahmanism. The task is to seize their “awakened” meanings. Based on this author’s explorations as 
a student in psycholinguistic and general semantics (Kwee, 1982), here is a list containing a selection 
of terms which could be acquainted with as “deep metaphors”. Their proposed psychological meanings 
discard literal exegesis, e.g. of Mara (Padhana Sutta).7 
Table 1: Selected Buddhist Terms/Metaphors and Proposed Psychological Meanings
======================================================================
  Rebirth: psychologically, this is limited to a this-worldly/daily recurrence of emotional episodes
6-Realms of rebirth: 1. heaven, 2. hell, 3. titans, 4. hungry ghosts, 5. humans and 6. animals
Heaven: feeling “godly” as if in heaven, a metaphor of bliss/pride which doesn’t make one a god
Hell: feeling the heat of “hellishness” if hateful, angry, furious, resenting, hostile, and aggressive
Titans/demi-gods: experiencing conﬂ ict, struggle, ﬁ ght, envy/jealousy, distrust, and paranoia 
Hungry ghosts: frustrated state due to insatiable craving/grasping/clinging to impermanence 
Humans: most common/normal rebirth realm that offers the best opportunity for Buddhahood 
Animals: most frequent depictions are a cock (greed), a snake (hatred), and a pig (ignorance) 
Nirvana: experiencing extinction of the state or trait of unwholesome affect/emotional arousal 
Dukkha: a damaged wheel axle preventing a cart from riding smoothly, a simile for suffering
Mara: mental projections of emotions re lust-confusion as a deadly “army” of demonic states
Poisons: intoxicants, metaphoric for the psychological afﬂ ictions of greed, hatred, and ignorance 
Brahmaviharas: “divine dwellings”, metaphoric for kindness, compassion, joy and equanimity
Arahant: not a saint, but someone who has vanquished her/his inner enemies and is awakened
Wheel of life: cycle of life-death of this-worldly, daily karmic greed, hatred, and ignorance 
Karma: not fate or destiny, nor a book-keeping of “good” and “bad” deeds, but intentional action 
======================================================================
7  Obviously, I am not the ﬁ rst or only to point at the metaphoric nature of the Dhamma/Dharma. The late Ven. Bud-
dhadassa discerned “everyday language” and “Dhamma language” in 1966, October 8, in a splendid lecture at Suan 
Mokkhabalarama, Chaiya, Thailand (www.buddhadasa.com/naturaltruth/twolanguage1.html).  However, to date it seems 
that only few people consequently apply psychological interpretations. E.g., if dukkha is literally the axle of a chariot’s 
wheel that does not run smoothly, if the chariot is subject to wear away due to life’s imperfection and impermanence 
(anicca), and if the chariot when torn apart does not accommodate any self or soul ( anatta), then this is a psychological 
simile about the 3-Empirical Marks of Existence of human beings. 
198
Conference
 That karma is not the bottom line of an accounting system of deeds but rather a “no-nonsense” 
teaching of calming, nirvana, insight, and emptiness/not-self is illustrated in the following anecdote 
on the Indian Bhikshu Bodhidharma, the alleged founder of Chan, who, in 521, visited the emperor 
Wu, a great patron of the Dharma. Having built many priories, the emperor asked what merit his 
generosity had earned. «No merit,» was the answer. Astonished, he asked what the Dharma’s supreme 
essence is. «Vast emptiness, nothing holy», was the reply. Finally, he asked, «Who are you?» «Don’t 
know» said Bodhidharma alluding to not-self. In a psychological approach, karma leads to rebirth in 
the space of body/speech/mind. This can take place in heaven or hell. That heaven and hell are to be 
sought here-now, was already acknowledged for centuries like in the following koan (Reps, 1957): 8
A proud warrior - a samurai - visited a Zen master to learn about heaven and hell; do they 
really exist? Instead of answering immediately the teacher kept him waiting for a while, 
treating him like a beggar. The samurai gradually became impatient, angry, and at last 
demanded a proper answer. «You are too stupid to understand», the master replied. Furiously 
the samurai drew his sword to kill the teacher, who at this very moment raised his index 
ﬁ nger and then said: «Experience the gate of hell!» All of a sudden the samurai understood 
that this was his lecture, bowed in deep grace and kneeled in merciful surrender. The monk 
smiled, raised his ﬁ nger again and concluded: «Experience the gate of heaven!» (Hakuin, 
1685-1768)
Karma Sequence
As karma usually refers to the becoming/birth and the ageing/death of feelings like pain 
and pleasure in a recurrent cycle of rebirths, this gives rise to the idea that this birth and death 
are not physical, but an analogy to explain the beginning and end of daily pleasures and pains. 
Thus, metaphors for birth and death are a poetic description of the Dependent Origination, arising, 
peaking, subsiding, and ceasing of karmic sequences which take place during “emotional episodes”. 
The cycle of births and deaths of suffering (samsara) can be ceased by transforming the karma of 
drama, distress, and agony into the karma of contentment and nirvana. Hence, Karma Transformation 
aims at preparing the “nirvanic extinction” of karmic arousal by skillfully eradicating unwholesome 
karma moving forward, i.e. by working at unsatisfactory rebirths one by one. The therapeutic aim 
of Karma Transformation is to prepare and lay the basis for working at contentment and nirvana, 
but not at “emptiness” and Buddhahood. Karma Transformation is therefore only an initial phase 
in a long Buddhist quest. This ﬁ rst phase is meant to alleviate the suffering of anybody who feels 
distressed or in agony and needs therapy. Only when calm, tranquilized, and freed from the quagmire 
of emotional impasse, with or without therapy, is one able to pursue the next phase. This second 
phase targets Buddhist aims and is therefore almost exclusively suitable for Buddhists who want to 
take up the painstaking journey toward not-self and Buddhahood. 
Before going into the Karma Sequence as the operational centerpiece, let us dwell on 
the raison d’tre of Karma Transformation. This is a transformative process of eliminating emotional 
quandaries and conceptual confusion by decreasing unwholesome karma and increasing wholesome 
karma. Skilful and wholesome karma is rooted in non-greed ( alobha), non-hatred ( adosa), and 
non-ignorance (amoha), while unskillful/unwholesome karma is rooted in the 3-Poisons: greed 
8  A koan is an exemplary teaching anecdote comparable to jurisprudence in law making. 
Karma Sequence
199
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
(lobha), hatred (dosa), and ignorance (moha). Ignorance refers to not-knowing how the mind functions. 
Pitfall is the difﬁ culty to see and understand the projections of the mind which result in the illusion 
of “self” and the delusion of “god/s”. The antidote to ignorance is (1) wisdom on the mechanisms 
and workings of the mind and (2) knowledge and savvy about putting this wisdom in practice. 
The remedy to heal greed is heartfelt generosity. The cure for hatred is loving-kindness. Because 
body/speech/mind inhere in the causes and effects of karma, the 3-Poisons afﬂ ict body and bodily 
action, contaminate speech and vocal action, and deﬁ le mind and mental action. 
From my clinical point-of-view greed and hatred mask negative “basic emotions”. Greed 
conceals the fear of future loss and the grief of past loss. Hatred is the result of anger which could 
proliferate (papanca) to other-hate/aggression and self-hate/depression. The socio-cultural expressions 
of depression, anxiety, anger, and grief are the prime targets to decrease. They are the emotional 
states to zero in during Karma Transformation which then works at focusing on feelings which are 
neither painful, nor pleasurable. Affect of neutrality and contentment clear the air for the alternative 
scenarios of joy, love, and serenity. In Karma Transformation client and therapist usually dig into 
the karmic feelings/thoughts/activity of a past event, when things went wrong, in order to ameliorate 
future emotional episodes. Hence, the focal point is here-now, even if the intentional activity was 
originally created in the past (puranakamma): one cannot but live in the present. If discussed here-now, 
emotional events that took place in the past are something of the present and usually one also gets 
the same feelings. Even though the subject stems from a very long time ago, the karmic implication 
of the past (kammavipaka) becomes actual and changeable now (navakamma). 
Karma Sequence almost always takes place in a relational context and starts with a stimulus 
situation, here called an “emotional episode”. This can be summarized as: It is not the perceived 
things without or within (point A-activating event) that upset me (point C-consequence) but my very 
own thoughts-images/conceptions and concurrent interpretations-evaluations/judgments (point 
B-beliefs) which make me feel bad, sad, and mad (C: emotion) and motivate me to intend/plan 
regrettable karmic acts (C: behavior).9 This ABC terminology, derived from Ellis’ REBT (Kwee & 
Ellis, 1998), is an echo of the Buddha’s saying that “we are what we think…”, 10 which emphasizes 
responsibility (Dhammapada): “By oneself is unwholesomeness done and is one afﬂ icted; by oneself 
is unwholesomeness not done and is one not afﬂ icted. Afﬂ iction and non-afﬂ iction depend entirely 
on oneself; no one can non-af ﬂ ict another.” A most educative presentation of the ABC is through 
the following Jataka-story inspired simile:
9  We have 100 billion nerve cells (neurons) i.e. 1 million billion connections ﬂ ickering when we think: ca 1000 
thoughts per hour which is about 16.000 up to ca. 64.000 per day of which 95% is the same as yesterday’s thoughts and 
85% is negatively colored (C. Greer, National Science Foundation; www.hvacproﬁ tboosters.com ). 
10  The Dhammapada (423 verses; transl. Byrom, 2001), a gem of world literature, clari ﬁ es (Byrom, 2001; p.3):
“We are what we think. All that we are arises with our thoughts. With our thoughts we make the world. Speak or act with 
an impure mind, and trouble will follow you as the wheel follows the ox that draws the cart. We are what we think. All that 
we are arises with our thoughts. With our thoughts we make the world. Speak or act with a pure mind, and happiness will 
follow you as your shadow, unshakable. ‘Look how he abused me and hurt me, how he threw me down and robbed me.’ 
Live with such thoughts and you live in hate. ‘Look how he abused me and hurt me, how he threw me down and robbed 
me.’ Abandon such thoughts and live in love. In this world hate never yet dispelled hate, only love dispels hate. This is the 
law, ancient and inexhaustible… However many holy words you read, however many you speak, what good will they do 
you, if you do not act upon them?” NB: As in the Rohitassa Sutta, by “the world” is not meant the world in the beyond or 
out there (in the iron age conceived as ﬂ at), but the mind’s world, with data entering through the sense doors and whose 
minutiae are observable in meditation: “In this very one-fathom-long body, along with its perceptions and thoughts, do I 
proclaim the world, the origin of the world, the cessation of the world, and the path leading to the cessation of the world.” 
200
Conference
Once in a forest, a sleeping hare heard a hullabaloo. Believing it’s the end of the world, 
he began to run. Thinking the same, others joined him: the deer also thought so and joined 
the ﬂ ight… and one species after the other started running until all animals were in a frantic 
sprint which would eventually have lead to their demise. When the Buddha saw them in 
panic, he asked them: “why?” “Because the world ends”, they said. The Buddha: “That 
can’t be true... let’s ﬁ nd out why you think so.” Questioning them in succession, he ﬁ nally 
arrived at the hare that started the run: “where were you, and what were you doing when you 
thought ‘it’s the end of the world’?” The hare: “I was sleeping under a mango tree”... 
the Buddha hypothesized: “you probably heard a mango fall... startling you (A, the activating 
event), you thought it’s the end of the world (B, the un/wholesome belief), you took fright 
(Ce, the emotional consequence) and ran (Cb, the behavioral consequence)... let’s go back 
to that tree... to verify and falsify”... Thus, the Buddha saved the animal kingdom.
In a more scholarly fashion, the commonality comes to the fore in the ﬁ ring order of 
the “street” (vithi) which refers to our Karma Sequence as described in the Abhidhamma (the deeper 
teachings, one of the three canonical works containing numerical abstractions of the Buddha’s discourses 
written by adepts). The street follows 17 inﬁ nitesimal steps of mind moments (cittas) which strikingly 
correspond to the ABC-sequence:
There is an Activating event (e.g. a mango falling): 1. baseline awareness (e.g. deep sleep) 
~ 2. vibrating input (a sound) ~ 3. interruption (waking up) ~ 4. adverting (5 sense doors) ~ 
5. perception (e.g. eye consciousness) ~ 6. receiving awareness-attending ~ 7. investigating 
awareness by “the mind’s eye” (incl. memories) ~ 8. determining/noting awareness by “the 
mind’s eye” (incl. memories) ~9~10 ~11~12~13~14~15… impulse awareness: reﬂ ection by 
un/wholesome Beliefs with a karmic history and fresh intentional will to (not) act as 
a Consequence engendering an emotional and a behavioral output ~ 16~17 followed by 
subliminal storage and retention of an I-me-mine/self experience. (NB: 6~7~8 refer to 
apperception which is post-perceptual but pre-conceptual, observable in mindfulness; 9-17: 
include the therapeutic awareness that might transform unwholesome karma into neutral 
feelings.)
Candle Karma and Domino Karma
Interestingly, neither the REBT centerpiece, nor the Karma Sequence endorses a “ghost 
in the machine”. Because the khandhas, which we call psychological modalities, are empty, 
this basically implies that there is no self to identify with. The self’s emptiness is obvious when 
the nature of reiﬁ ed abstractions is understood. Pirsig’s Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance
(1974) deals with this issue: where does inherent existence, soul, or self reside if the bike is torn 
apart? This is a variant of a comparison highlighted in the Milindapanha (2nd century BCE): 
the Bhikkhu Nagasena explained the Indo-Greek King Menandros that the modalities are like 
the chariot’s parts. Mind deconstructed in its modalities disintegrates like a decomposed body like 
a chariot. Its constituent parts are but a temporary assemblage. The Buddha also used the analogy 
of a lute, whose elusive music is composed by the combination of strings, box, and bow that is full 
of momentary experience but empty of the “self-nature” of eternal sound ( Sigalovada Sutta). Not 
only sound, but all perceptible phenomena are impermanent, non-abiding, and ever changing by 
Candle Karma and Domino Karma
201
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
nature, thus they are essentially empty and lack “inherent existence” (sabhava). The self exists only 
as a mind construction that freezes the ﬂ ux of the modalities’ processes and is therefore nothing but 
an illusion. Another way to arrive at self’s emptiness is Nagarjuna’s (2nd century) sunyata/S, 
the emptiness of everything that is impermanent. He discerned the “ultimate emptiness of not-self” 
and the “provisional self of the householder” who is aware of the futility of a name, but simultaneously 
appreciates the convenience of “being indexed”, e.g. by having an identity card. The crux is to keep 
karma un-afﬂ icted by not attaching to greedy or hateful thoughts/feelings/deeds. The following two 
schemes are tools of analysis.  
The candle metaphor (cf. Gaddulabaddha Sutta). Habitual behavioral patterns
are the bulk of regrettable intentional action. With the negative karmic impact of regret, 
reﬂ ection as well as karma’s assessment often begins. Habits come about by the interplay of 
the khandhas. The dynamic combination of modalities reﬂ ects the structure and process of what is 
called “personality”, i.e. a snapshot description of a psychological pro ﬁ le. These comprise body-
rupa-kaya/speech-vak-alapa/mind-nama-citta out of which consciousness or vinnana emerges and 
functions through awareness. Mindfulness enables the full experience of the modalities: perceiving-
sensing (A), conceiving-cognizing (B), emoting-feeling (Ce), and conating-acting (Cb). Experiencing 
may take place consciously, in full awareness, or non-consciously, in subliminal awareness, depending 
on the willful attention paid to what is perceived outside or inside the body. Our daily experiences 
are mostly governed by habit which happens “automatically” due to too ingrained conditioned and 
conditional learned responses. A habit may be an inappropriate reaction to an activating event 
requiring adequate consequences which is a process of ﬁ guring out and creating new beliefs. Whether 
the client’s responses are adequate, appropriate, and wholesome can be experienced on the affective 
level. 
An inadequate response is likely connected to some emotionally distressed and unhappy 
feeling and is often the beginning of somebody’s voluntary paying attention and focusing 
awareness to the modalities. In line with the metaphor, Karma Transformation eventually results in 
ﬂ ame extinction (nirvana) (see Table 2).
202
Conference
Table 2: The Buddha’s Karma Sequence and REBT’s Centerpiece: Parallel Approaches to 
Karmic Emotional Episode©
Body/speech/mind (kaya/vak/citta): 
Basic mindfulness11 of the phenomena 
in these spaces 
A momentary external or internal stimulus conﬁ guration impinges on 
the subject, i.e. something one is aware of in ﬂ eeting sense consciousness 
after detection and being in contact with on the radar screen of one of 
the six sense organs, to be perceived…
Perceiving (vedana): Awareness of 
the 6 Senses (seeing, hearing, smelling 
tasting, touching, and the mind’s eye), 
felt: + / 0 / –
Activating event: sensing, while apperceiving, which is post-perceptual 
but pre-conceptual, there is willful attending and perception which is 
inﬂ uenced by memory and recognition, and the perceiver gets some sense 
feeling (partly overlapping affect/emotion) which is relatively positive, 
negative, or neutral...
Conceiving (sanna): Awareness of 
projections due to ignorance: illusion 
of self and delusion of god(s)
Beliefs: imagery and conceptions, the cognitive representation by the subject 
becomes interpreted and evaluated – i.e. dualistically fabricated and 
proliferated as good/bad, right/wrong, etc. – and to be tapped as ir/rational 
and un/wholesome cognitions and ideas…
Conating (sankhara): Awareness of 
ignorant craving and subsequent 
proclivities of action: greed-grasping 
or hatred-clinging
Consequences: karmic affective/emotional and (interpersonal) behavioral 
responses – having appraised thoughts (“self-talk”) as unskillful-irrational/
unwholesome, the subject skillfully transforms these into new rational/
wholesome thoughts in order to plan/emit new karmic rational/wholesome 
motivated intentional activity...
Consciousness (vinnana): Advanced mindfulness is the next post-therapy phase to bodhi.…
(2) The domino metaphor ( cf. Dutiya Gaddulabaddha·Sutta).  Unwholesome karma, 
noticeable by craving affect, grasping thought, and clinging behavior, does not breathe the quality 
of freedom, it feels like being shackled. Wholesome karma is free from attachments. It is a state 
attained when ignorance is over and knowledge is wisely applied. Like in a court of justice intentions 
and wishes count less than actual facts, observable conduct, manifest behavior, pre-meditated 
performance, or motivated action comprising karma.12 However, planned intentions form the seed 
for future activity. To be mindfully aware of them prevents unwholesome karma and likely promotes 
wholesome karma. Karma’s working is elucidated by the Buddha through an analysis of its 
conditionality/functionality comprising 12 links, interconnected like domino pieces. This is a more detailed 
assessment than the candle view (Conze, 1980). The domino metaphor offers a this-worldly/here-now 
interpretation of these links and discerns three parts: a general part (steps 1-4), a speciﬁ c part (steps 
5-10), and a cyclical part (steps 11-12). They are translated into the ABC-sequence (see Table 3). 
The metaphors of re/birth, ageing, and death have made many credulous followers believe 
that the 12-linked stepwise exposition is about the metaphysics of the soul, reincarnation, and 
“Transcendental Truth”, rather than a tool to closely examine Dependent Origination this-worldly/
11 As in the Bahiya Sutta: O Bahiya, whenever you see a form, let there be just the seeing; whenever you hear a sound, 
let there be just the hearing; when you smell an odour, let there be just the smelling, when you taste a ﬂ avour, let there be 
just the tasting; when you experience a physical sensation, let it merely be sensation; and when a thought or feeling arises, 
let it be just a natural phenomenon arising in the mind. When it is like this, there will be no self, no I. When there is no 
self, there will be no moving about here and there and no stopping anywhere. That is the end of dukkha. That is nibbana. 
Whenever it is like that, then it is nibbana. If it is lasting, then it is lasting nibbana; if it is temporary, then it is temporary 
nibbana. In other words, it is just a principle.
12  In a way Karma Transformation resembles “detectiving” because like a Private Investigator, confronted with a puzzling 
act through a killed body, will always look for the motive of the murderer, the Buddhist psychotherapist is keen about 
the whereabouts (ABC) of an act (karma) and the motive/s (hetu) leading to karmic suffering. 
203
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
here-now. The metaphysical ﬂ irtations notwithstanding, the Buddha was not concerned with 
the cosmological order of the universe. He was involved with the impermanence of the human 
condition and the quest to know how to come to grips with the fringes of existential trouble due 
to impermanence/imperfection. That the Buddha’s discourses unambiguously reject metaphysics, 
cosmology, and ontology, and breathe a this-worldly/here-now psychological spirit can be read in 
the following quote (Sabba Sutta): 
The eyes and forms, the ears and sounds, the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, 
the body and tangible things, the mind and mental objects… If someone should set this “All” 
aside and proclaim another “All”, it would be just talk… because this would be beyond 
the limits of his abilities. 
Table 3: A Psychological Interpretation of Karma’s Dependent Origination 
======================================================================
Link 1 conveys that the links are a stepwise model about karmic greed, hatred, and ignorance which 
concurs with REBT’s ABC-centerpiece and displays an emotional episode, as follows:
Link 2 explains A: while ignorant, an Activating event arises in sensorium, e.g. a ﬁ ght
Link 3 explains B: out of this, awareness arises, i.e. irrational Beliefs on the ﬁ ght
Link 4 explains C: out of B, Consequential emotional action (Ce/Cb) arises, e.g. aggression
Link 5 speciﬁ es A: out of bodily sense organs as condition, perceiving arises
Link 6 speciﬁ es A: out of perceiving, contact arises, e.g. seeing John
Link 7 speciﬁ es B: out of contact, cognitive experiencing arises, e.g. feeling angry
Link 8 speciﬁ es B: out of inferences, craving evaluations arises, e.g. “I wish him dead”
Link 9 speciﬁ es Ce: out of craving unwholesome emotions arise, e.g. hatred (other-blame)
Link 10 speciﬁ es Cb: out of hatred as motivation, aggressive behavior will ﬁ nd expression
Link 11 A-B-C cycling: step 10 originates the conception and re/birth of steps 5-10
Link 12 A-B-C cycling: birth of an emotion undergoes ageing toward death, rebirth, etc.
======================================================================
Karma Transformation
Psychotherapy by Karma Transformation takes place after assessment by means of the Karma 
Sequence formulated as the ABC-centerpiece of an emotional episode. Typically, a client will not 
seek council for a “problem of greed or hatred”, s/he will likely come with complaints of depression, 
anxiety, anger, and/or grief. The therapist then pinpoints, in collaborative practice, the treatment 
target like for instance “overcoming the incapacity of crying while in a sad situation of divorce 
from a verbally violent husband”. Despite it is functional to be strong and to “stick to her guns”, 
it would be stronger and healthier to cry than not to cry. Crying is not per se weakening and could 
Karma Transformation
204
Conference
even strengthen one’s immune system; hence it is advisable to cry when alone or with family or 
friends to get rid of the waste products in tears. Hence, the target is not to cry in the middle of yelling 
and scolding, but to learn to cry if sad. In this case the client was in ﬁ rst instance encouraged to 
visualize sad situations of the past and to watch movies with the potency to strike a sensitive string. 
In second instance, Karma Transformation using the ABC-centerpiece weighs in. The Activating 
event is: “Sitting while visualizing him damaging my clothes and jewelry after my telling to leave 
him”, The irrational Beliefs with unwholesome karmic impact are: 1. “He shouldn’t yell at me and 
now he does, he’s a son of a bitch…”; 2. “He mustn’t scold at me; I wish him bad luck…”; 3. “He is 
a lazy man, how could I ever marry him?” And so on. The karmic Consequences of these thoughts 
on the emotional level are “Anger/hatred” and on the behavioral level of manifest action is “Having 
restless legs”.13
After formulating the ABC, the transformational karmic Dispute and aimed karmic Effect 
come next in the process. The pursued goal (E) set by the client is: “To feel sad and cry if alone, but 
to stay ﬁ rm with regard to my divorce decision, and feel relatively happy amidst life’s adversity”. In 
order to attain this aim each cognitive strand is “microscoped” by ﬁ rst disputing (D) its completeness 
by questioning the evaluation impacting the emotional experience. Evaluations lie below the tip of 
the iceberg of the surface cognition. The second step is to question the un/wholesomeness and ir/
rationality of the complete cognition. A thought is wholesome and skillful if it is rational/logical/
realistic/factual and likely leads to the pursued goal of intrapersonal and interpersonal harmony. 
In the vignette, the ﬁ rst sentence is completed through questioning its evaluative and motivational 
impact resulting in: “He shouldn’t yell at me and now he does, he’s a son of a bitch… and I hate 
him.” The second sentence: “He mustn’t scold at me; I wish him bad luck… because I hate him.” 
And the third sentence: “He is a lazy man, how could I ever marry him? ... I wish I never met him, 
now I’ve ruined my life, stupid me.” Table 4 provides karmic wholesome/rational cognitions, alter-
natives accrued in collaborative practice.
Table 4: Three Karma Transformation Scripts
======================================================================
The creation of an alternative for the ﬁ rst sentence: “He shouldn’t yell at me and now he does, he’s 
a son of a bitch… and I hate him” goes as follows: Is this thought rational/realistic and wholesome/
skilful, and will it result in my karmic goal? “This thought is irrational and unrealistic, because he 
has reasons which are logical from his stance, hence the most rational and realistic thing to do for 
him is that he should yell at me which is not reasonable to me, but that does not make him a son of 
a bitch all of a sudden… besides his mother is my daughter’s grandmother”… “To think this way 
is unwholesome because it leads me to hate him and his family and others who do like him… Hate 
creates hollowness in me and is not healthy for my system, it works like poison and could make me 
sick… I can’t love him anymore, but perhaps …yes sure, I can empathize with his feeling of being 
deserted by a woman, which happens to be me… and stay friendly with him despite what and how 
loud he is yelling at me, now… and stay friendly next time we meet again”… “My goal to feel sad 
and cry if alone, but to stay ﬁ rm with regard to my divorce decision will be reached with my new 
karmic thoughts, because the ﬁ re of anger and the poison of hate will diminish, if I really believe in 
what I’m just thinking… my softness/sadness will return and in due time, if triggered, the chances that 
13  The thoughts in this case vignette, although realistic, are inspired but not based on reality; they are made up for 
illustrative purposes. 
205
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
I’ll cry if alone and feel happy again, even in pain of divorce, are now increased… crying cleanses 
my system, detoxiﬁ es, and pours waste out of me, let me therefore surrender in crying whenever 
and wherever suitable, so that I can rise in loving-kindness.” 
The second sentence: “He mustn’t scold at me; I wish him bad luck… because I hate him.” Is this 
thought rational/realistic and wholesome/skilful, and will it result in my karmic goal? “The fact that 
he’s mad at me for leaving him is unwise of him but highly understandable to me... whatever he 
scolds at me, if I stick to my mantra that sticks and stones can break my bones but words will never 
hurt me, he may scold at me the nastiest things possible and I can remain in my serenity, if I decide 
and want to”… “So, he must scold at me and it would be illogical if he wasn’t scolding at me if he 
is furious and not eating up his anger: can I then feel compassion for him and empathize...? …since 
it’s irrational not to expect him to scold at me and it’s more realistic to expect that he will or even 
must scold at me, it’s just good that he scolds at me”… “To wish him bad luck is to wish me and 
our daughter bad luck which is therefore an unwise wish… I’d better wish him good luck because 
his happiness will increase everyone’s happiness… and if I do so, say so to him, I wish you the best 
of luck and the happiest of happiness now we are separated, this could create good-will and at least 
not create ill-will”… “Hatred is fermented anger which will result in a life which carries an acetiﬁ ed 
taste… and since I do not wish a sour life but a sweet and happy life full of love and kindness… 
my energy is better used to be kind now to him, even if it’s hard”… “My goal to feel sad and cry 
if alone, but to stay ﬁ rm not to share life with him… will be reached with my new karma as hate 
diminishes… and if I deeply believe my wholesome thoughts and act to my new intentions… 
the chances that I’ll feel happy again amidst adversity will increase.”  
The third sentence: “He is a lazy man, how could I ever marry him? ...I wish I never met him, now 
I’ve ruined my life, stupid me.” Is this thought rational/realistic and wholesome/skilful, and will 
it result in my karmic goal? “A realistic view would be that he isn’t lazy but a man who usually 
behaves lazy”… “With the wisdom of the present, it is an irrational wish to not having met him 
back then when I felt joy and was hopeful to share life with him, and even to bear and give birth to 
our child… all of which was meant to be happy as a family… however, as many marriages this one 
was also bound to end in separation”… “Calling me stupid will only motivate self-hatred and is not 
realistic by any standard… Is it stupid not to presage this end? As I am not a fortuneteller, I could 
not foretell this unfortunate chemistry occurring between laziness and my temperament, so it was 
not stupid at the time… but with today’s painfully gained wisdom, it had been better to stay attracted 
at some distance and to ﬁ nd out character in/compatibilities ﬁ rst which is my karmic decision now 
when I meet a nice young man who doesn’t behave lazy I would like to relate with... so, it was 
a mistake which does not make me a stupid person: at worst I did a stupid thing, which I can always 
correct like I did by separating”… “By thinking so, I’ll stay in friendly relationship with myself… 
this self-talk/self-conversation is meant to have a fresh start and build up a new life which would 
not be possible if I am ruining myself by irrationalities… I would not say such to someone I love 
…unless meant as teasing… Human beings are fallible, even Einstein made mistakes (would 
the Buddha have made a few mistakes?) … To make a premature and false foregone conclusion 
that I’ve ruined my life because of this marriage is ruining karma and won’t result in my aim to feel 
sad, cry alone, be ﬁ rm on my divorce, and feel happy amidst the hardness of life… so, let me cry in 
unconditional self-acceptance asap and boost wholesomeness.”  
======================================================================
206
Conference
Although opaque, there is an epistemological hierarchy in the above rational analyses which 
follow the ladder of abstraction. One needs to be aware of conceptual abstractions which boil down 
to the adage of general semantics that “the map is not the territory”. This implies that speech/
language can be viewed as a map of the map of the map, and so on, which may lead to identiﬁ cations 
and rei ﬁ cations of I-me-mine/self, unless there is awareness of the natural order of abstraction. 
Mindfulness counters our self-made maps and semantic reactions, and could secure the “pure” 
perception and description of the territory. Language moves from the concrete to the abstract and 
from the speciﬁ c to the general. If we never get general, we don’t say anything and if we don’t get 
speciﬁ c, “real” meaning might remain obscure. Irrationality arises when stuck on the abstraction 
ladder. Faulty abstractions include: dead level abstracting (e.g. fear of fear, angry at anger, sad about 
sadness), selective abstracting, arbitrary inferring, misattributing, inexact labeling, dichotomous 
reasoning, overgeneralizing, magnifying, minimizing, catastrophizing, and personifying. These errors 
are subject to correction. Abstracting accurately follows the logics of the ladder and starts with 
a factual description (e.g. “this is a heartbeat”). It continues by a personal inference (e.g. “this feels 
nasty”) and results in some emotional evaluation (e.g. “this is my death”) which ﬁ nally motivates 
karma (e.g. “calling an ambulance”). A sane order of abstraction starts with the “silent” level of 
the impermanent “process world” of the territory, i.e. atoms, molecules, cells, and so on. What follows 
is “mapping” which is a descriptive report of the bare facts, i.e. a mindful neutral observation. 
Subsequently there is an inference containing a cognitive judgment (e.g. “I’ve made a mistake”), 
and ﬁ nally, there is an evaluation, i.e. an emotional value judgment (e.g. “I’m a worthless human 
being”). Interpretations and evaluations usually happen unconsciously, automatically, or mindlessly. 
Mindfulness raises awareness. 
Further Similarities
My own work as a therapist in almost four decades was to demonstrate that the pan-Buddhist 
Dharma and REBT share a common paradigm and use comparable tactics. These are summarized 
in the following seven points (Kwee & Holdstock, 1996). (1) Although their aims are seemingly 
different, REBT and the Dharma both work toward optimizing mental health: curing psychologi-
cal disorders vs. ceasing existential suffering, distress, and agony (dukkha). (2) Similar to dukkha, 
REBT expounds that life is a hassle from which there is no escape; both agree that there is no need to 
suffer needlessly. (3) While the Buddha’s message is to transform karmic activity toward 
wholesomeness by skillfulness, REBT aims at eradicating irrational cognitions and dysfunctional 
emotions by changing them via the ABCDE-format. (4) REBT uses homework as an integral part of 
advancing self-therapy; Buddhism’s reliance on self-healing is adamant as in the Buddha’s last words: 
And whoever Ananda, now or after I am dead, shall be… a refuge to themselves, shall take 
to themselves no other refuge, but seeing…  [the Dhamma as a refuge], shall not seek refuge 
in anyone but themselves, it is they, Ananda… who shall reach the further shore! But they 
must make the effort themselves (Humphreys, 1987, p.94). 
(5) Surprisingly, REBT also propagates the abolishment of (most of) the human ego by 
deﬁ ning ego or self as the sum total of c/overt behaviors, thus of karma. The rational stance is 
not to judge behaviors/actions simply because there is no accurate way to rate them. Whatever 
the outcome, rationally it cannot impact the person as a whole. This is in line with the Buddhist 
Further Similarities
207
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
practice not to blame the person while rejecting her/his cognitive de ﬁ lement and emotional 
afﬂ iction. REBT’s stance is comparable to Buddhism which abolishes all of the self on the ultimate 
level while acknowledging a “provisional self” for practical reasons. 
In both cases the admonition is not to identify with anything in an impermanent world of 
ﬂ ux and hence to ban the semantics of the “is of identity”. By questioning the validity of the verb “to 
be”, mindful attention enables clarity that there is no static self to identify with: “I” consists of many 
”iiiiiiiiiiii’s” (as a husband, lover, dad, teacher, pie-eater, and so on). This resembles the Buddha’s 
expression on the modalities of clinging: “this is not me/mine, this is not what I am, this is not my 
self” (Anattalakkhana Sutta). For instance, a client is depressed when thinking: “He must love me 
or else I am a worthless human being.” Applying REBT’s Unconditional Life-Acceptance, 
Unconditional Self-Acceptance, and Unconditional Other-Acceptance, the following alternative 
applies: “By thinking so I won’t reach my goal of regaining equanimity regarding him or myself. 
There is no evidence that he must love me, nor is there any proof that my worth depends on being 
loved by him. The fact is that if he loves someone else exclusively, he must not love me which feels 
sad and regrettable, but it is no reason to detest myself as a human being. My worth of self cannot 
be judged because there is no accurate way to rate it. My mere existence warrants my value 
unconditionally. By avoiding disharmony with myself, with him, and with life, I will feel OK.” 
(6) Next to the most important procedure of the ABCDE-format, there are two dozen 
additional techniques to tackle emotional disorders. Due to space constraints, these will not be dealt 
with here. Sufﬁ ce to say that they intervene in the domains of cognition-imagery, affect-emotion, 
and inter/personal behavior and show some overlap with Buddhist interventions (P. de Silva, 1984). 
The Buddha also proposed speci ﬁ c techniques and highlighted e.g. 12 interventions (Premasiri, 
2003). The ﬁ rst seven are preventive (Sabbasava Sutta):
1. Wholesome affect is preceded by right/balanced/sustainable views: to see not-self and 
understand that beliefs about events, not the events per se, evoke emotionality.
2. Restraint: it is wholesome to practice self-control and not to cling to what one “must/
should” have or not have with regards to what had entered the sense doors   
3. Wise indulging in one’s basic physiological needs like food, clothing, shelter, to safeguard 
against physical illness and promote mental well-being.
4. The discipline to endure most pressures from the psychological, physical and social 
environment to secure freedom from unnecessary and needless worries.
5. To drop unwholesome/unskillful thoughts: one is timely mindfully aware of them, i.e. right 
from the start before they are able to affect unwholesome karma.
6. To avoid places and situations one does not need to be and which might expectedly 
engender psychological cankers, unwholesome thoughts and emotions.
7. To prevent cankers, one cultivates awakening by being: aware, investigative, persistent, 
enthusiastic, serene, concentrated, and equanimous.
The next ﬁ ve, derived from the Vitakkasanthana Sutta, deal with a ﬂ ow of unwholesome karmic 
habits. They are consecutively listed and translated into ABCDE terms as follows:
208
Conference
8. Whenever an unwholesome thought enters awareness, one replaces this with another 
wholesome thought (e.g. blaming and forgiving): Changing B into D.
9. If that fails, examine the harmful consequences of the unwholesome thought and its 
inevitable product: the creation of suffering all around: Formulating C and E.
10. If that fails, forget the thought and engage in attention diversion: look for wholesome 
distraction like reading a sutta or jogging: Changing A into another A.
11. If that fails, investigate and reconstruct the antecedents of the thought and remove its 
cause; e.g. ABC-sadness preceded next ABC with B of anger and fear of sadness.  
12. If that fails, resist with force: be harsh and radical by for instance clenching teeth or 
pressing the tongue against the palate: Changing C-behavior into E-behavior.
Notably, the Buddha dealt with persisting habits and automatic thoughts. Beware if they 
become obsessive thoughts; they intrude into mind against our will and manifest themselves in 
a repetitive fashion as if they are not ours. Obsessions and compulsions, if generalized to behavioral 
acts, come about when mind tricks us by mechanically shifting attention away from a grave emotional 
knot totally beyond awareness. One advisably turns mindfulness onto the emotional problem, usually 
something relational and extreme like fury or bereavement, as to disentangle and unwind. Buddhist 
Psychotherapy could weigh in here from assessment to remedy. All means and methods are to be used 
like a raft. If the river is crossed, there is no need to carry the boat around (Alagaddupama Sutta). 
(7) The Buddha also applied empirical wisdom, comparable to evidence-based methods. 
This is exempliﬁ ed by a homework assignment of a performance-based intervention in this inspiring 
vignette on being obsessive against the backdrop of denial (Dhammapada):
Kisagotami, a mother, mourned and wept about the death of her two year old son. Her kid 
was bitten by a poisonous snake. As she could not accept his death, she was out of her senses 
with grief. Nobody could comfort her and at last she desperately went to the Buddha for 
advice. “How can my son be cured?” she asked the Buddha, who replied: “There is only 
one way to help you and your child. Look for a black mustard seed that must come from 
a house where no one has ever died and which should be given to you by someone who has 
no deceased relatives”. The woman left with her corpse and sought from house to house, 
but was unable to ﬁ nd such a seed. Finally she realized what the Buddha meant with his 
assignment, got healed, and buried her child.
In effect, Karma  Transformation  is a confluence of REBT and Buddhism through 
the psychological modalities/khandhas of clinging and the ABCDE format around the 3-Poisons and 
basic emotions. Capturing all of this requires the observational awareness of “basic mindfulness”: 
(1) awareness of sensory perception (seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, tasting, and viewing 
through the mind’s eye), (2) awareness of irrational cognitions due to ignorance on how the mind 
works resulting in projections: illusory selves (I/me/mine) and delusional god(s), (3) awareness 
of un/wholesome cognitions of intending (volition and conation) and the motivational factors of 
action, and (4) awareness of unwholesome thoughts which reﬂ ect the proclivity of irrational craving 
(“musts/shoulds”), greedy grasping (“should have”), and hateful clinging (“must not be”). Basic 
mindfulness opens the window for “advanced mindfulness” which unveils the Dependent Origination 
and interactivity of body/speech/mind and the psychological modalities; this includes their karmic 
209
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
antecedents and consequents. Eventually the result is balanced interaction, emptiness, and 
Buddhahood.
In Closing
A pointer indicating that the Buddha is a psychotherapist and that his Dharma can be inferred 
as an applied psychology is the illness metaphor of his “4-Ennobling Realities”.14 These are: there 
is suffering, to be understood (diagnosis), this is due to ignorance, to be abandoned ( cause), there 
is a way out, to be realized ( prognosis), and this way comprises the “8-Fold Balancing Practice”, 
to be cultivated ( therapy). Attention (8) and awareness (7) are the two components constituting 
mindfulness which require effort to develop wholesomeness (6) to apply in life (5) on karmic activity 
(4), speech (3), and intention (2), whose effect depends on a realistic view (1): mental suffering 
exists and can be ceased. To luxuriate on the metaphor, the illness to be cured is a “dis-ease” to be 
healed and as dis-ease refers to mind and speech rather than to body, the cure is not medication 
but meditation (Kwee & Holdstock, 1996). It is bold but not unrealistic to draw the analogy of 
the Buddha as a 21st century clinician. His acumen in dealing with greed, hatred, and ignorance based 
on a wholistic view of body/speech/mind resembles the World Health Organization’s paradigm of 
the human being as “biopsychosocial” system (Engel, 1977). If agreed that the Buddha dealt with 
the mind and its concomitants, he could be called the ﬁ rst psychologist and psychotherapist ever. 
To be sure, Buddhist Psychotherapy by Karma Transformation takes place in the space of 
the “provisional self” and the client’s self-talk. Framework is the collaborative practice of dialogical 
speech between client and therapist. The quintessence of change is that un-skillfulness leads to 
unwholesome, irrational, and “unhealthy” karma, while skillfulness leads to wholesome, rational 
and “healthy” karma. All of these is rooted in non/greed, non/hatred, and non/ignorance (e.g. Baahitika 
Sutta and Chakkanipata Nidana Sutta ). Apparently ﬁ tting original meanings, psychological 
interpretations of karma do not have the monopoly on “truth”. Others who prefer interpretations in 
terms of “good/right/virtuous” vs. “evil/wrong/sinful” will consider theirs as true. However, such 
explanations squeeze Buddhism into religious and ethical pipelines (Keown, 1992) which were not 
included in the pristine Dhamma. Buddhist Psychotherapy discards Eurocentric, utilitarian, and 
un-aesthetical interpretations by appreciating the empty nature of the self and of Buddhism itself which 
includes the present views. Interestingly, even the last of the original Buddhist thinkers, Dharmakirti 
(7th century), who belonged to the Yogacara denomination, dealt with epistemology rather than 
with religion or ethics (Dunne, 2004). He discerned valid ( prama) and invalid (aprama) thoughts 
as if he was a cognitive-behavior therapist. Dharmakirti secured cognitive validity by scrutinizing: 
(1) the direct object of observation, evident and public; e.g. a tree, (2) its private cognitive 
representation appearing as mental images and as (3) conceptualizations colored by inferences 
(e.g. “a hateful stinking tree” or “a lovely comfortable parasol”). The validity of cognitions is rooted 
in the 3-Empirical Marks of Existence which are congruent to the non-absoluteness and relativity 
of reason.
14  From a psychological view of emptiness which discards Transcendental Truths, it would be erroneous to continue to 
use the Eurocentric expression “Four Noble Truths” for the Pali: catvari aryasatyani. 
In Closing
210
Conference
The practice of Karma Transformation is concerned with down-to-earth daily hassles like 
anger which, if accumulated, could explode in aggression. In the Buddhist lore anger is seen as 
garbage; but rather than something merely destructive to cut down and throw out, anger can be 
“composted”, a transforming process of creativity (Thich, 1998). If expressed as catharsis to feel 
good in the short-term, the opposite will probably occur in the long run. One likely becomes angrier 
and if reciprocated by the other a vicious samsara cycle might develop; somebody will get hurt and 
physical damage might occur. Pounding on a cushion is not a solution either; although relieved 
the seed of anger will continue to slumber. The Buddhist attitude to take care of anger does not 
mean to suppress or run away from it, but to allow its “suchness” and tolerate the “hellish” experience 
in silence. While breathing in and out, tenderly embracing the anger, one focuses on the anger in 
mindful and neutral observation, let it be. The garbage of anger hides ﬂ ower seeds of kindness, 
compassion, joy, and equanimity. By the sun beams of attention garbage ferments into dung, 
empowering the lotus’ ﬂ ourishing. 
Nirvana, long-lasting trait or short-lived state, belongs to the normal range of human 
experience and is not something “out of orbit”. It is accurate to state that nirvana is attained if 
the ﬂ ames of emotions are extinguished. Negative emotions, i.e. confusing depression, suffocating 
fear, burning anger, and drowning sadness, belong to the basic emotions from which the variations 
of affect are derived. Basic emotions can be depicted as layers of an onion, consecutively from 
the outer to the inner: depression, anxiety, anger, sadness, joy, love, serenity, and nirvana. The ﬁ rst 
group of four are quite unwholesome, thus to be abandoned, while the second group is quite 
wholesome, hence to be cultivated. In the Buddhist lore love (kindness/compassion), appreciative 
joy, and relational equanimity are to be acquired and “immeasurably” ampliﬁ ed to secure wholesome 
karma. Interestingly, the term emotion is derived from the Latin verb e-movere, which means “to be 
moved”. This being moved or in motion implies that there is a condition engraved as “unmoved”, 
not being in motion due to “nirvanic extinction”. 
A practitioner of Karma Transformation, therapist, coach, or teacher, practices what s/he 
preaches. Practice implies meeting new challenges which accrue new learning experiences. After 
all, “nobody is perfect” and balancing toward contentment, happiness, and Buddhahood is usually 
a life-long cultivation. The Buddhist therapist not only shares wisdom and savvy, but also helps 
the client to become her/his own therapist. Since there are different strokes for different folks, Karma 
Transformation seems not particularly suitable for the faint-hearted who will be better off by “dos” 
and “don’ts”, religion, ethics, or the metaphysics of heaven and hell. For those who wish to choose 
and are capable to think and decide for themselves, a psychological roadmap built on ancient 
wisdom and evidence-based science may engender karmic bliss. Nonetheless, as M.W.P. de Silva 
(pers. comm., 2008), nestor of Buddhist Psychology, cogently admonished: “science may enhance 
the credibility and relevance of Buddhist concepts, but awakening may be achieved without science.”
211
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Scriptures
Most Indian references in the text refer to Pali (P) suttas; Sanskrit terms are indicated as such (S), 
except for the household terms like karma or nirvana. All suttas and sutras can be found online, 
e.g. www.metta.lk (for suttas) and www.e-sangha.com (for sutras).
References
Byrom, T. (Transl.).(2001). The Dhammapada. New York: Bell Tower.
Conze, E. (1980). A short history of Buddhism. Oxford, UK: One World.
De Silva, M.W.P. (2005). An introduction to Buddhist psychology (4th ed.). London: Palgrave-
Macmillan.
De Silva, M.W.P. (2010). Buddhist and Freudian psychology. Carlton North, Australia: Shogam 
Publications.
De Silva, P. (1984). Buddhism and behavior modiﬁ cation. Behavior Res earch & Therapy, 22, 661-678.
Dunne, J.D. (2004). Foundations of Dharmakirti’s Philosophy. Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications.
Engel, G.L. (1977). The need for a new medical model: A challenge for biomedicine. Science, 196, 
129-135.
Humphreys, C. (1987) (Ed.). The wisdom of Buddhism. London: Curzon Press.
James, W. (1902). Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature  (New York: 
Random House.
Kalupahana, D. (2010) The foundations of Buddhist psychology. In M.G.T. Kwee (Eds.), 
New horizons in Buddhist psychology: Relational Buddhism for collaborative practitioners 
(pp.53-78). Chagrin Falls, OH: Taos Institute Publications., 
Kalupahana, D.J. (1987). The principles of Buddhist psychology. Albany, NY: State University of 
New York Press
Keown, D., (1992). The nature of Buddhist ethics. London: The Macmillan Press. 
Kwee, M.G.T. (1982). Psychotherapy and the practice of general semantics. Methodology & Science, 
15, 236-256.
Kwee, M.G.T. (2011). Relational Buddhism: Toward the social construction of societal harmony 
in-between-selves. In Proceedings of the 8th International Buddhist Conference on 
the United Nations Day of Vesak Celebrations, “Buddhist virtues in socio-economic 
development”, 2554/2011, May 12-14, Ayutthaya, Thailand (pp.304-317). (Also online: 
www.icundv.com/vesak2011/book/Symposium2011_ﬁ nal.pdf )
Scriptures
References
212
Conference
Kwee, M.G.T. (Ed.).(1990). Psychotherapy, Meditation, and Health: A Cognititive-Behavioural 
Perspective. London/The Hague: East-West.
Kwee, M.G.T. Kwee (Ed.).(2010). New horizons in Buddhist psychology: Relational Buddhism for 
collaborative practitioners. Chagrin Falls, OH: Taos Institute Publications. 
Kwee, M.G.T., &  Ellis, A. (1998). The interface between Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 
(REBT) and Zen. Journal of Rational-Emotive & Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 16, 5-44.
Kwee, M.G.T., & Holdstock, T.L. (Eds.). (1996). Western and Buddhist psychology: Clinical 
perspectives. Delft, Netherlands: Eburon.
Kwee, M.G.T., & Kwee-Taams, M.K. (2010a). The collaborative practice of Karma Transformation: 
Cyclical emotional episodes and their sequential rebirths. In M.G.T. Kwee (Ed.), 
New horizons in Buddhist psychology: Relational Buddhism for collaborative practitioners 
(pp. 375-394). Chagrin Falls, OH: Taos Institute Publications.
Kwee, M.G.T., & Kwee-Taams, M.K. (2010b). Karma functional analysis, strategic interventions, 
and mindfulness meditation. In M.G.T. Kwee (Ed.), New horizons in Buddhist 
psychology: Relational Buddhism for collaborative practitioners (pp. 395-416). Chagrin Falls, 
OH: Taos Institute Publications.
Kwee, M.G.T., Gergen, K.J., & Koshikawa, F. (Eds.).(2006). Horizons in Buddhist Psychology: 
Practice, Research & Theory. Chagrin Falls, OH: Taos Institute Publications.
Lyubomirsky, S. (2008). The how of happiness: A scientiﬁ c approach to getting the life you want. 
New York: Penguin. 
Mikulas, W. L. (1978). Four noble truths of Buddhism related to behavior therapy. Psychological 
Record, 28, 59-67.
Pirsig, R.M. (1974). Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance: An inquiry into values. New York: 
Bantam Books. 
Premasiri, P.D. (2003). Studies in Buddhist philosophy and religion. Sri Lanka: University of 
Peradeniya.
Reps, P. (1957). Zen ﬂ esh, Zen bones. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle.
Smith, D. (1982). Trends in counseling and psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 7, 802-809.
Thich, N. H. (1998). Interbeing: Fourteen guidelines for engaged Buddhism. Berkeley, CA: Parallax 
Press. 
213
The Lost Art of Sadness: & the Meaning of Love and Grief
Professor Padmasiri de Silva
Monash University, Australia
PRELUDE
The basic message of the Buddha embodies a liberation path from the shackles of human 
suffering, as well as a righteous and harmonious life for the householder. How is this path related to 
the modern therapeutic quest? The answers may vary for different therapists. For me the relationship 
is integral both in theory and practice. A crisis of grief and sadness bordering on mild depression and 
a remarkable emergence of back to normal life, rich, invigorated and robust, made me take to the path 
of a trained professional therapist—to make it a mission in my life to work at the Springvale community 
centre for four years offering free treatment for clients, and it was for me a priceless service 
(de Silva, 2008). Along with this experience, a gradual period of training at the feet of a most cherished 
meditation guru in the Nissarana forest monastery in Meethirigala, Sri Lanka, helped me to chart 
new horizons for linking therapy and the spiritual life. Drawing from this nourishing wellspring, 
I have developed what may be described as a mindfulness-based emotion focused therapy (EFT).
This essay looks at the emotions constellation of grief, sadness, depression, boredom and 
two faces of melancholy—as depression and existential anguish. Most important, this essay has 
a focus on the reclamation of the lost art of sadness.
INTRODUCTION
“Sadness is an inherent part of the human condition, not a mental disorder. Thus to confront 
psychiatry’s invalid deﬁ nition of depressive disorder is also to consider a painful but an important 
part of our humanity that we have tended to shunt aside in the modern medicalization of human 
problems. As science allows us to gain more control over our emotional states, we will inevitably 
confront the question of whether normal intense sadness has any redeeming features or should be 
banished from our lives. Such a momentous scienti ﬁ c and moral issue should not be spuriously 
resolved by using a semantic confusion in the DSM that mistakenly places states of intense sadness 
under the medical category of disorder” (Horowitz and Wakeﬁ eld, 2007, 225: for short H & W Study; 
term DSM: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders)). Thus if we follow the implications 
of this engaging and erudite study on the loss of sadness, we need to understand as Sigmund Freud 
observed: Though grief involves grave departures from normal life, “It never occurs to us as morbid 
and hand over the mourner to a medical treatment condition” (Mourning and Melancholia).
Even those who value the DSM criteria for depression as an accepted bench mark for health 
professionals, agree that the DSM ‘overpathologizes’, many people with quite legitimate sadness in 
the face of adversity, thus merging the normal experience of sadness with diagnosis of depressive 
disorder (Biegler, 2011,66). 
PRELUDE
INTRODUCTION
214
Conference
While accepting the great value of focusing our attention on the importance of grief and 
sadness in this (H & W) study, it is somewhat thin on the alternative therapeutic orientations and 
more so the new mindfulness-based western therapies. By the embedded logic of mindfulness practice 
rooted in the Buddhist world view, these therapies have opened a new pathway to understand 
depression by focusing on the content of depressive thinking, relationship to negative feelings and 
changing perspectives by ‘decentering’ or depersonalizing - thus opening up channels of communication 
between mindfulness in daily life and in therapeutic settings (Williams, Teasdale, Segal, Kabat-Zinn, 
2007).
To some extent, the need for emphasizing on the positive facets of grief and sadness has 
been rectiﬁ ed by fresh thinking in the therapies of mindfulness -based action commitment therapy 
(Harris, 2006). 
Lewis Wolpert is a biologist who had gone through a severe depressive disorder, eventually 
recovering, and in a very insightful book, described depression as ‘malignant sadness’. “If we are 
to understand depression then we need to understand emotion. For depression I believe is sadness 
that has become pathological. Depression is a disorder of emotion” (Wolpert, 1999, 74). He 
recommends the study of the logic of different emotions, their constellations and interactions. 
In addition to looking at the lost art of sadness, the present paper is an attempt to develop Wolpert’s 
insight by exploring the theme of a mindfulness-based, emotion-focused therapy.
Collective Suffering and Sadness in ‘Panic Cultures’ 
To strengthen my case for looking at the lost art of sadness, I also wish to show that grief 
and sadness are central human emotions which we may convert as a time for re ﬂ ection, keeping 
the love of the lost one alive, a context for developing resilience and dedicating ourselves to engage 
in positive acts of generosity and gratitude in the name of those whom we have lost. In the present 
analysis, I also wish to focus your attention on the more recent dimension of ‘collective sorrow’, 
in the contexts war and con ﬂ ict, natural disasters—the poignant loss of life and the emergence of 
what are described as ‘panic cultures’.  A dimension of socially engaged therapies dealing with 
such panic cultures is becoming important for counseling and therapies.  Padmal de Silva captures 
the basic thrust of this genre of studies in an article on the Tsunami experience of the Buddhists in 
the coastal towns of Sri Lanka (Padmal de Silva, 2006, 281-87).
As an integral part of this paper, I wish to present to you a context of war and conﬂ ict, and 
also to use as a case study, a work of literature. The use of art helps us to communicate the tensions 
and the ambiguities of collective suffering. Commenting on the war in Vietnam, it has been said that 
art, poetry, music and the novel have the power of immortalizing human values, even in the thick 
of war and violence.  It has been observed that one of the crushing ironies of the Vietnam war is 
that we have been the recipient, time and again, of the gifts of the spirit, gifts of art—the bravery of 
an artist and poet that faces the cruelty and the horror, and brings to the blood, vengeance and cruelty—
a remarkable sea change (Berrigan, 1993, 3, Foreword To, Thich Nhat Hanh, Love in Action, 1993).).
Grief is of course, a period of silence, space for mourning - followed afterwards - a reassertion 
zand acceptance of the tragic loss. And ﬁ nally, if one is lucky, endowed, perceptive, brave with 
the bravery of an artist and poet, one creates something that faces the cruelty, the horror, and he 
215
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
brings to the welter of blood, vengeance, cruelty and deceit, a “sea change” (Berrigan, 1993, 3). 
Thich Nhat Hanh also observes that authentic Buddhist art by a monk about his people displays 
real qualities of inwardness, almost austerity, a patience that escapes monitors and timepieces and 
a serenity misunderstood in the west as stoicism (1993, 7).
Guns and Roses: A Case Study
The novel Giniaviyai Rosemalai  (Guns and Roses) by a Sri Lankan novelist, Vineetha 
Wijeratne, captures the tensions and suffering of a ‘panic culture’. There are four linking threads 
around which the story is woven. First is the background of war, terrorism and the emergence of 
panic culture in the north eastern part of Sri Lanka during the violent ethnic con ﬂ icts. The second 
thread in the story is the remarkable life of a family displaced, injured, incapacitated struggling with 
remarkable courage-- to rise above depression, anger and hopelessness to generate a resurrection, 
and a rebirth of the spirit. The author comments—“for people who are drowned in poverty and have 
no way of spending the day, the rising of the sun marks the emergence of ‘just another day’”. It is 
this background that illuminates the third thread, the central theme, the meaning of love and grief. 
This section centers around the intimate love that emerged between Amaranath and Chulani, the girl 
from a poor family who was able to gain admission to a university for pursuing medical studies. But 
during the emergence of these strong links between Amaranath and Chulani, an unexpected decision 
on the part of Amaranath to join the army was a point from which the poignant logic of the story 
enters a new phase. It was a difﬁ cult decision to both of them. As time passed, a false rumor spread 
that Amaranath had suffered death at the hands of the enemy and the body that was brought to 
the village was considered as that of Amaranath without any doubt. During this turning point in 
the story, Chulani summoned lots of courage and pursued her medical studies with great determination 
to help injured soldiers. But the ﬁ nal turning point of the story was the most unexpected one. While 
treating an injured soldier—Chulani was bedazzled to discover that this injured soldier is Amaranath. 
But the tragic part of the story is that Amaranath had lost one of his legs in the battle scene. 
The remarkable climax to the story is that with all the disabilities of her one time lover, Chulani 
decides to marry Amaranath. 
At this point in the story, I was reminded of a saying of Tolstoy: those whom we love make 
us suffer, but that same love can heal our suffering. Qualities that emerge at this point in the story is 
Chulani as a true heroine in the novel—remarkable qualities of resilience, compassion and equanimity.  
As I was reﬂ ecting on this remarkable display of compassion, I was reminded of a statement made 
by my meditation guru Ven. Dhammajiva from the Nissarana forest monastery in Meethirigala, 
Sri Lanka: “Real mettā is ﬁ nding a reason to be glad under any circumstance”, and according to 
him this point is embodied in the novel, Pollyana. Plollyana’s father was a Christian missionary and 
did not have enough money to buy toys for the child and Pollyana expected to ﬁ nd a toy when they 
received the missionary bag, which unfortunately did not have a toy for her. Pollyana was feeling 
miserable but her father said she should be able to ﬁ nd a reason to be glad under any conditions and 
that she should be happy that she had a ﬁ ne body and her leg was not broken and Polyana realized 
that she had a healthy body and regained her pleasant composure. This idea became Pollyana’s 
philosophy of life. Chulani did not have that same consolation about Amaranath but she did reconcile 
her to the new challenges with radiating compassion without remorse and anger.
216
Conference
A fourth thread runs through the novel— offering the hand of help and assistance, of shade 
and space to those in the other ethnic group by this family. We ﬁ nd here remarkable sentiments 
of love and compassion across religious and ethnic differences—a small oases in a troubled land! 
Hosking says at a seminar on the power of compassion that a willingness to bear another’s misery 
brings a degree of strength, surrender and sacri ﬁ cial love to the word compassion (Hoskin, 2005, 
4). Within the rich tapestry of village life depicted in the novel, the remarkable ethnic and religious 
harmony that pervaded this small village was amazing. Vineetha practically spent time in this area 
meeting and talking to people. This is a novel very close to what happened in real life.
Catherine Lutz the anthropologist who presented a ground breaking study of grief in the Paciﬁ c 
Island, Ifaluk, discovered that people used the same word, fago –to cover compassion, love and sadness 
and that compassion is a great shock absorber. She observes that this term ‘fago’ compresses a string 
of ideas - that life is fragile, that connections to others are both precious and yet liable to severance 
through death—and that love may equal loss (Lutz, 1995, 235).  The Buddhist concepts of dukkha, 
mettā and karunā also have a similar conﬁ guration in Buddhist cultures.
The Pervasiveness of Human Suffering
No doubt fate would ﬁ nd it easier than I do to relieve you of your illness. But you will be 
able to convince yourself that much will be gained if we succeed in transforming your 
hysterical misery into common unhappiness. (Freud 1953, vol. ii, Studies in Hysteria, p.305).
“Freud Showed real profundity when he stated that the aim of psychoanalysis was to replace 
neurotic unhappiness by normal unhappiness. A psychiatry based on a purely hedonistic ethics, 
a psychiatry that does not recognize that periods of anxiety and periods of melancholy are a necessary 
part of human life, such a psychiatry will be no more than a superﬁ cial affair. Our task is not merely 
to relieve but to interpret.” (M.O’c.Drury, 1973, 22).
Buddhism starts with the normality of human suffering and Freud said he was merely trying 
to convert neurotic unhappiness to normal unhappiness, and Hays et al express a similar sentiment:
Some mental health problems are pathological in the traditional sense. But short of giving 
nearly every citizen one or more syndromal labels, no amount of progress in the area of 
psychological disease will remove our need to explain and address the pervasiveness of human 
suffering. Most humans are hurting - just some more than others. It is in effect normal to 
be abnormal (Hayes et al, 2003, 6).
Psychological disorders which are not ‘clinical disorders’ & the Call for Counseling Close to 
Ordinary Life
It has been observed that there are  many instances of psychological problems of 
varying intensity which are not considered as clinical disorders—loneliness, alienation, boredom, 
meaninglessness, low self-esteem, existential angst, pain associated with sexual concerns, domestic 
violence (Harris, 2006).  Also, it is seen that some people who go through these problems, add 
an extra burden of pseudo-suffering by repression, denial and deception that can be handled by 
217
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
self-knowledge, transparency and honesty about one self. Also such normal people, close to ordinary 
life would gain by counseling geared for ordinary life, and not clinical disorders. Mild depression 
is also a quality that runs through routine lives as a temporary phase, which has to be handled 
with wisdom and opening out your problems for friendly conversation with wife, husband, friend 
or religious adviser. My own counseling practice was focused on what I called ‘the magic of 
the ordinary’, simple things to do in routine life. For instance, an addict who looks for the bottle, 
after coming home in the evening, after work, may get use to enjoying a nice samosa or a chicken 
role with a hot cup of coffee, and then see a teledrama, do some cooking or gardening; also plan 
some camping and enjoying outdoor life for holidays. As I succeeded in my counseling, if a client 
cannot be transformed into complete abstention, following Alan Marlatt, we could convert him to 
a controlled drinker, without suffering from suppressed temptation (de Silva, 2008). It is not 
the best solution but a pragmatic and realistic solution resting on compassion for a suffering client, 
who in this case brought back happiness and love to his family. Stress management and anger 
management are good examples of issues in routine lives. I found that the advice given by the celebrated 
Vietnamese monk, Thick, Nhat Hanh, in his essay on, “How to eat a mandarine” sums up our loss 
of simple enjoyment by complicating routine lives—what I call the “Magic of the Ordinary and 
the Elegance of Small Things” ; de Silva, 2008).
Lawful Nature of Things (Dhamma Niyama)
During the time of the Buddha, there was no clinical concept of abnormality but he rather 
found whole cultures driven by craving, addictions, self-indulgence and reactive behavior. In fact, 
in The Greater Discourse on the Simile of the Elephant’ s Footprint (MI, 186-1910, the Buddha 
has virtually predicted the earthquakes, tsunami, bush ﬁ res and the tornados. In the way that 
the disturbance of the ‘internal’ four elements may create disturbances within a person, there will 
come a time, he says when there will be a disturbance, a kind of revolt of the earth, water, ﬁ re and 
the air elements, which may destroy whole villages. During contemporary times, the pervasiveness 
of human suffering, as well as the wellspring of human generosity, compassion and kindness has all 
been seen in these settings of unbelievable disturbance of the normal order of things. The laws of 
psychology (citta niyāma) and morality (kamma niyāma) which are two dimensions of the nature 
of things, explain the consequences of lives dominated by excessive craving and envy (abijjhā), 
reactive anger (vyāpāda) and wrong views, as well as a life focused on truthfulness, compassion 
and goodness of heart.
Part II
Mindfulness-Based  Emotion-Focused Therapy  (EFT)
One of the successful therapeutic methods that I used in dealing with the problems presented 
by my clients is the mindfulness-based EFT.  EFT in the west is associated with the pioneering and 
celebrated therapist Leslie Greenberg. Long before I came in contact with Greensberg’s work, as 
a philosopher I had been working with what I call the logic of emotion concepts like anger, sadness, 
fear, greed, boredom, jealousy and pride (see. de Silva, 2005 4th edition). While following Paul 
Ekman’s work on the Darwinian scheme of basic emotions (Ekman, 2003), I also looked at more 
218
Conference
emotions in relation to the material in the Buddhist suttas like what Gabriele Taylor calls the emotions 
of self-assessment, pride, conceit, humility, shame, guilt, remorse, and also jealousy (Taylor, 1985; 
de Silva, 1994). I was equally interested in the positive emotion proﬁ les of loving kindness, compassion, 
altruistic joy and equanimity. The paper on equanimity presented at UNDV 2010 ( de Silva) brings 
out a new concept in positive emotions, that of emotional balance, very effective in managing intense 
grief and sadness. It is encouraging to ﬁ nd that Alan Wallace and Paul Ekman have developed 
the concept of “Cultivating Emotional Balance” (CEB) emerging as an exercise in education but 
having a great therapeutic potential. Wallace has made a useful contribution to the conceptual 
clariﬁ cation of the notion of well-being in Buddhism (Wallace and Shapiro, 2006). 
As I moved into professional therapy, I attempted to isolate the emotions that dominated 
within a client’s proﬁ le. For instance, reactivity (anger, repugnance, ill-will), attachments to things, 
symbols (grasping) along with submerged states of conceit.  I found different forms of sadness, 
ranging from those colored by immense love and grief (as found in the novel ‘Guns and Roses’), to 
those consequent on loss, frustration, remorse and guilt. But any blend of anger and sadness with some 
ambivalence was a complex and difﬁ cult situation. These constellations also move into depression:
If sadness dominates depression, we speak of retarded depression; if agony is more prominent, 
it is an agitated depression. People who are depressed not only feel helpless to change their 
lives, they feel hopeless. They do not believe it will ever get better. In addition to sadness 
and agony, guilt and shame are strongly felt, for depressed people feel they are worthless… 
anger directed inward or out, and fear are often manifest (Ekman, 2003, 93).
Part  III
The Emotion Proﬁ le of Sadness & Working with Emotions
“Thus promoting emotional processing in cognitive approaches, arousal of fear by 
imaginative stimulation in behavioral approaches, emotional insight in psychodynamic approaches, 
increased depth of experience in experiential approaches and communication of feeling in 
interactional approaches are all aspects of working with emotion that are seen as important within each 
perspective”. (Greenberg, 2003, 1). All these approaches are important in looking at the management 
of sadness. But my focus is basically on the management of emotions—emotion focused therapy 
(EFT).  The best exponent and the pioneer of EFT is Lesli Greenberg. I have shown in a separate paper 
presented at a recent Mahidol University conference on Buddhism and science, basic resemblances 
and differences between the EFT of Greenberg and my own version of Mindfulness-Based  EFT  
( (de Silva, 2011, In the Press). But the new revolution in emotion studies has integrated the affective,
cognitive, motivational and the attentional dimensions of emotions. A full blown emotion has all 
these facets including the physiological aspect of emotion. The Buddhist guide to mindfulness practice 
known as the Satipaṭṭhāna integrates all these facets: the body, feelings, perceptions, thoughts, 
thought patterns and the nature of phenomena (both physical and psychological) and the underlying 
technique is the use of mindfulness/attention (sati) (Nyanaponika, 1999). In dealing with sadness, 
we start with the calming of the body; then looking at the emergence of feelings of pleasure, pain 
and neutral—if we ‘put our breaks” here, painful feelings would not develop into sadness or anger; 
the focus on thoughts and thought patterns deals with what cognitive therapist call the ‘autopilot’, 
219
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
breaking through automatic and conditioned thought processes. We also look at the meaning giving 
dimension of cognition, that help us to differentiate sadness from the close neighbors of sadness, 
as well as emotion clusters, like the entry of anger into sadness. It is an extremely fascinating bit of 
lab work looking at the chemistry of these basic emotions. 
In looking at the pro ﬁ le of sadness, in primary sadness there is the experience of parting 
and separation, loss, feeling of being left out of attachments, and dif ﬁ culties in communication. 
Communication is a very important facet of ‘sadness’ and inhibition of genuine communication can 
be damaging. Apart from the loss of a loved one, shattered hopes, loss of job, and getting uprooted 
from patterns of comfortable living, as we witness in the context of recent natural disasters are 
the many contexts for sadness. In secondary sadness, it is more complex with feelings of being hurt, 
grief—feelings of being damaged, wounded, ignored, unrecognized, rejected (Greenberg, 2003, 163). 
Basically, the distress centers on an irrevocable loss, and there is an emotional need for sympathy 
and understanding. Collapsing into tears and feeling hopeless is natural but the most important 
therapeutic step is acceptance.
The goal in mindfulness in therapy is to help the patient relate his emotional life, and all of 
his experience, in a different way. It is not an attempt to eliminate sadness, worry, or anxiety, 
but to help the patient see things in a different light when they do arise. Thoughts and feelings 
are not in our control, but come and go on their own (Bien, 2006, 69)
(1) In Greenberg’s EFT awareness and acceptance is the starting point. The therapist “works 
with the client to help the client approach, tolerate and regulate, as well as accept their emotions” 
(Greenberg, 2010, 22)
(2) Emotional expression: The client must also be in live contact with their emotions, and 
thus develop effective exposure to previously avoided feelings. While arousal and tolerance of emotions 
is necessary, optimum emotional processing involves the integration of cognition and affect.
(3) Emotion Regulation. When emotions such as sadness, fear, shame and powerlessness, 
overwhelm people, there is a need to help people regulate their emotions by getting them some 
‘distance’ from them. Any attempt to regulate emotions by preventing themselves from feeling 
the disturbing emotions, withdrawing, avoiding, use distraction strategies, transform emotions 
by psychosomatic complaints or even seek stimulus seeking enjoyment to drown them are all 
counter-productive. In Buddhist practice, loosening the personal identi ﬁ cation and seeing sadness 
as an impersonal process that emerge, stay for a while and pass away is recommended.
In fact, at this point Greenberg integrates mindfulness practice into EFT.  Important means 
of regulating emotion include regulating breathing and mindfulness - the non-judgmental observation 
and description of one’s emotional states. Basic emotion regulation skills includes naming the emotion, 
describing the emotion in one’s body, clarifying the event that evoked the emotion, and understanding 
one’s interpretation of the situation and the actions prompted by the emotion (Greenberg, 2008, 206). 
Naming and labeling are techniques used in mindfulness practice. 
220
Conference
(4)  Reﬂ ection on emotional experience at the level of deep experience is recommended. 
Buddhism recommends wise reﬂ ection (yoniso manasikāra) which can be extended to routine life.
(5) Transformation of one emotion by another is the ﬁ nal method, quoting Spinoza, 
“an emotion cannot be restrained nor removed by another emotion unless by an opposed and stronger 
emotion” (Ethics, iv, 195).
Buddhist Pathways For Managing Negative Emotions
1. The Method of Restraint takes a preventive stand instead of damage control. The ability 
to ‘step back’ and make a choice is a mature achievement in emotion management. This is useful in 
the case of emotions like anger and lust where the motivational roots are important and one can be 
aware of emotional triggers without any reactivity. But in the case of sadness, especially grief at 
the loss of a loved one, there is no choice, it just comes like an avalanche. Restraint would be useful 
in trying to handle one’s sadness in a thoughtful manner.
2. The Method of Remedying .  The reference to Spinoza reminds one of the method of 
antidotes in remedying a negative state. The four divine states of loving kindness, compassion, 
altruistic joy and equanimity are crucial and presented as antidotes for sadness. Loving kindness 
ﬁ rst begins by directing it towards one self and then reaching others, from the lost one, and others in 
the family, and then towards a more universal feeling with other beings. The ability to embrace all 
parts of oneself without guilt and self-hurt and the ability to connect with others helps one to break 
through feelings of separateness and ego-centric concerns. While compassion and generosity may 
be practiced in our daily life, it is also a meditative state with positive therapeutic value. Equanimity 
balances love and compassion by bringing in balance and realism, as well as a sense of acceptance 
of the tragic as part and parcel of the nature of things. 
3. Transforming negative emotions instead of demonizing them is a technique where grief 
may be converted into a patience, resilience, a sense of realism, forgiveness, courage and so on.  
This is what Carl Jung described as emotional alchemy, converting brass into gold. Venerable 
Nyanaponika observes that one should not throw away negative emotions, and quotes from  
The Little Locksmith, (Nyanaponika, 1986, 55): “If you throw away a thing it is gone. Where you 
had something you have nothing. Your hands are empty, they have nothing to work on. Whereas 
almost all those things that you throw away, are capable of being worked over by a little magic into 
just the opposite of what they were”. 
4. Liberation from an emotion by insight. Here one can use what the philosophers describe 
as the ‘componential theory of emotions’, where emotions are seen as constructions out of bodily 
sensations, feelings and thought patterns, and if you have a hard look at them gradually you see 
them emerging and passing away, and with a hard look they appear empty and evaporate. Here 
the notion of impermanence is applied to these “seemingly rock-like phenomena”.
5.  Dedication Through Gratitude. Solomon refers to the reﬂ ective and dedicatory qualities 
of grief, where we bring to our mind the good things by the person whom you have lost. What you 
do on behalf of those whom you have lost, especially in the case of parents are not considered as 
duties in the Kantian sense but emerges in the context of reciprocity, what parents do for children 
221
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
and what children do for parents, especially in the context aging followed by death. Gratitude and 
generosity practiced in the name of the lost one and compassion work together and are woven into 
rituals in Buddhist practice in Thailand and Sri Lanka
6. Living a good life is considered as the best way of respecting those who have departed. 
A moral life with openness, candour and vibrancy brings trust and conﬁ dence in one’s own life.
7. Sadness has to be viewed in terms in terms of mental and emotional balance. One’s 
experience of sadness has to strike a balance between a ‘de ﬁ cit’ and ‘hyperactivity’. If a person 
displays the necessary energy by way of motivation, seeing things clearly and handles issues of 
meaning at the cognitive level, feels without any deadness or passivity on the affective level combined 
with a good attentional level, there is no deﬁ cit. If a person gets agitated by grief due to the addition 
of anger, shame and fury, there is hyperactivity. If the way that the person handles his grief leads to 
more suffering and confusion, his response to grief is dysfunctional. This is a very brief summary 
of grief in the context of cultivating emotional balance. In a separate study I have shown in detail 
how the Buddhist concept of equanimity (upekkhā) takes up the role of mental and physical balance 
(de Silva, 2011).
In fact, the tradition of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression developed by 
Segal, Williams and Teasdale (2002),  and Williams, Teesdale, Segal with Kabat-Zinn (2007), are 
not cited in the H & W study. Using the mindfulness approach to therapy emerging on Asian soils, 
transferred to the west-- does it make any difference to managing depression?  Their approach 
differed from the earlier approach to depression of Aaron Beck in not disputing and analyzing 
negative thoughts but rather “holding thoughts and feelings in awareness rather than trying to change 
them”. It is an innovative eight session program directed towards managing depression relapses, 
using the objective scientiﬁ c study format for validation. 
Boredom
Boredom has a proﬁ le of its own and if you understand boredom well, that is one dimension 
along which you may not merely manage sadness but ﬁ nd positive pathways to overcome it.  Issues 
of values and meaning are important in understanding boredom, as value constraints play a crucial 
role in boredom. Boredom may also be described as an attentional crisis.
To realize that boredom does not come from the object of attention but rather from the quality 
of attention is truly a transforming insight. Frits Pearls, one of those who brought Gestalt 
therapy to America, said, “Boredom is lack of attention”. Understanding this reality brings 
profound changes in our lives (Goldstein, 1993, 80).
 You have an ability to be immensely interested in something that is exhilarating and 
beautiful in life, there is no room for the inﬁ ltration of boredom into your mind. Whatever the object, 
it is the subjective state of exhilaration which is within you that is important - it may be music, art, 
gardening, cooking or reading.  One dimension along which one may  manage sadness is to have 
an increasing enlargement and intensi ﬁ cation of interest in life. There has to be values and goals 
that energize one’s life and a dear one that one has lost, may be considered as a source of inspiration. 
In my personal journey through grief, I found these words of Tolstoy very inspiring: “Only people 
222
Conference
who are capable of loving strongly can suffer great sorrow, but this same necessity of loving serves to 
counteract their grief and heals them”. The boredom associated with sadness may be compared with 
another form of boredom, just to see its special nature. There is a kind of boredom which emerges 
out of the manic quality of life with all its “time-compression effect”: increased stress at work, sleep 
deprivation, burn out and workaholism. In contrast, people who are genuinely immersed in whatever 
they do, and motivated by intrinsic rewards enjoy the experience. So, whatever the type of boredom, 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi who is an expert on the psychology of the ‘ﬂ ow’ experience says that those 
who enjoy life and work have curiosity and interest in life, persistence and low-self-centredness and 
are attracted by intrinsic rewards. (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996). Boredom is a window to the properties 
of time, and novel, creative and meaningful ways of spending time is the answer. To understand 
the boredom that comes with loss and grief, we need to see it in terms of an attentional crisis.
SADNESS & SPIRITUALITY: THE CREATIVE FACE OF MELANCHOLY
There may be a gradation of differences between sadness in the secular and the therapeutic 
contexts and in a liberation oriented spiritual context. One point of linkage is that sadness and 
unhappiness is a basic ingredient of the human predicament. We have already described the sense 
of tragedy as well as the uplifting resilience and compassion described in ‘Guns and Roses’. But 
yet the young Siddhartha’s experience of the tragic (saṁvega) that made him renounce a princely 
thrown, describes best the most profound Buddhist perspective on the lost art of sadness. This spiritual 
perspective on ‘ saṁvega’ do have some close cousins in the therapeutic traditions, especially 
the existential psychotherapy of Irwin Yalom, and for him looking at the meaning of life and death 
is the ‘creative face of melancholy’ (Yalom, 1980, 435). Speaking of the writings of Dostovesky, 
Tolstoy, Kafka and Camus, Yalom says “…they suffered more keenly from a crisis of meaningless 
and with a ferocity born of desperation, plunged into creative efforts”. As has been well presented 
by Jennifer Radden, in Freud himself there is an interesting tension between the notion that 
melancholic propensities being rare and pathological and on the other hand, even a part of the human 
condition. This tradition that may be traced to Burton’s Anatomy of Melanchololy (Burton, 1621, 
1927), where he sees it as a part of the human condition and also that in this condition, sometimes 
you see exalted energy, different from what is found in depression.    
In the Buddha’s sermons, saṁvega is considered as an authentic spiritual emotion caused 
by the miseries of the world. The concept translated as agitation, stirring, trembling can be 
an invigorating experience. With the help of a graphic metaphor of four types of horses, the Buddha 
clariﬁ es the nature of authentic saṁvega: the steed that is agitated at the very sight of the stick; 
the steed that is agitated when its coat is pricked with a stick; the steed that is agitated when the ﬂ esh 
is pierced; the steed that is agitated when the bone is pierced. This is compared to four types of men: 
a person hears that in a particular town a person is af ﬂ icted; a person beholds with his own eyes 
a person afﬂ icted and suffering; a person sees his kinsman af ﬂ icted; the person himself is stricken 
with pain and suffering. The person who has followed the authentic path of the Buddha would 
convert this stirring, at whatever stage it occurs, towards enhancing his spiritual journey but others 
will be bewildered (paritassanā) and bemoan that they will be annihilated (Gradual Saying II, 13). 
Harnessing of such spiritual emotions has to be tempered by equanimity ( upekkhā) and emotional 
balance that helps a meditator to avoid on the one hand, the hindrance of restlessness and worry 
(uddhacca-kukkucca)  and on the other hand slothfulness ( thīna-middha). Authentic and energetic 
SADNESS & SPIRITUALITY: THE CREATIVE FACE OF MELANCHOLY
223
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
stirring with equanimity and balance is a bit of a walk on a tight rope! Equally important, a mind that 
is stirred by the suffering of fellow beings opens up to the way of compassion, and as the Buddha 
transformed the robber Angulimala, re-teaching the loveliness within him.
The bud stands for all things,
Even for those things that don’t ﬂ ower,
For everything ﬂ owers from within, of self-blessing,
Though sometimes it is necessary; to re-teach a thing its loveliness.
--(Galway Kinnel)
224
Conference
REFERENCES
Biegler, Paul, 2011, The Ethical Treatment of Depression: Autonomy Through Psychotherapy, MIT 
Press, London.
Bien, Thomas, 2006, Mindful Therapy, Wisdom Pulishers.
Brodsky, Joseph. 2005. “Listening to Boredom”.  Extracts from, ‘In Praise of Boredom’.  Dartmouth 
College Commencement Address.  Harper’s Magazine, March, 1.
Burton, Robert. 1621/2001,  The Anatomy of Melancholy., New York, New York Review Books. 
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. 1990. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal  Experience. New York: 
Harper-Perennial.
de Silva Padmasiri, 2008, An Introduction To Mindfulness-Based Counseling, Sarvodaya Vishvalekha, 
Ratmalana.
de Silva, Padmal,2006, “The Tsunami in Sri Lanka and its Aftermath: The Explorations of 
A Buddhist Perspective”,  International Review of Psychiatry, vol 18, no 3, pp281-287.
de Silva, Padmasiri, 1994, “Emotion Proﬁ les: The Self and the Emotion of Pride”, in Ames, Roger, 
Dissanayake, Wimal and Kasulis, Thomas.P. eds Self as Person in Asian Theory and 
Practice, Albany, SUNY Press, 
de Silva, Padmasiri, 2005, “Managing Grief and Loss: Compassion in the Buddhist Social Ethic 
& Meditative Life”, A Keynote Address, Power of Compassion, Proceedings of 
the Australian Psychological Society , Victorian Branch, Conference Proceedings,, ed. 
Kostanski, Marion, Victoria University.
de Silva, Padmasiri. 2010. “Mindfulness-Based Emotion Focused Therapy”.  Mahidol University 
conference on the Interface Between Buddhism and Science.  Mahidol (In the Press); 
Drury, M.O.C. 1973.  Danger of Words.  Routledge and Kegan Paul. London.
Ekman, Paul, 2003.  Emotions Revealed. Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London.
Freud, Sigmund, 1917/1957 “Mourning and Melancholia”. In, Collected Papers, V ol iv pp 152-70, 
authorized translation under the supervision of Joan Rivere. London: Hogarth press
Fromm, Erich. 1994. The Art of Listening. London: Constable.
Greenberg, Leslie & Paivio, Sandra, 2003, Working With Emotions in Psychotherapy, New York, 
Guilford Press.
Greenberg, Leslie, 2008.  Emotion-Focused Therapy. Washington D.C:  American Psychological 
Association, Washington
Greenberg, Leslie. 2010. February, Emotion Focused Therapy. Workshop Handbook, Sydney: IEFT.
REFERENCES
225
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Harris, Russel, 2006. “Embracing Your Demons, an Overview of Acceptance and Commitment 
Therapy”. Psychotherapy, Australia, V ol.12, Number 4, August, 2006.
Hayes C.Stephen, Krik D.Strosahl, Kelly, G.Wilson. 1999. Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. 
New York: Guilford Press.
Horowitz, Allan V . and Wakeﬁ eld, Jerome c. 2007.  The Loss of Sadness, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; (for short, H & W Study)
Hoskings, Peter, 2005, “Compassion: What is in a Word?”,  in, Kostanski, Marion ed. The Power of 
Compassion, Victoria University, Melbourne
Lutz, Catherine. 1995.  “Need, Nurturance and the Emotions in a Paciﬁ c Atoll”,  Emotions In Asian 
Though. eds. Marks Joel and Ames Roger T. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Morgan, Stephanie, P. 2005, “Depression: Turning Towards Life”, In, Germer, C.K. and Segel, 
Fulton Eds. Mindfulness and Psychotherapy, New York: Guilford Press. 
Nussbaum, Martha, 2003. “Compassion and Terror”, Daedalu. Winter, Issue.
Nyanaponika Thera,  1986, Contemplation of Feelings, B.P.S., Kandy.New York: Wiser.
Padmasiri de Silva, 2005, 4th edition, An Introduction to Buddhist Psychology, Palgrave-Macmillan, 
Hampshire and New York.
Radden, Jennifer. 2000. “ Love and loss in Freud’s Morurning and Melancholia: a rereading”, In, 
Levine, Michael P. ed. The Analytic Freud: Philosophy &  Psychoanalysis. London and 
New York: Routledge.
Ricard, Matthieu. 2007. Happiness: A Guide to Developing Life’ s Most Important Skills. London: 
Atlantic Books.
Solomon, Robert. C, 2007: True To Our Feelings: What Our Emotions are Really Telling U. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press
Thanissaro, Bhikkhu,  1999, Noble Strategy, W.A.V .E., Malaysia.
Wallace, Alan.B. 2007. Contemplative Science, Columbia University Press. New York.
Wallace, B.Allan, and Shapiro, Shauna, L. 2006, “Mental Balance and Well-Being”, American 
Psychologist, October, 2006.
William, Mark, Teasdale John, Segal, Zindel, Kabat-Zinn Jon. 2007. The Mindful Way through
Depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Wolpert, Lewis, 1999. Malignant Sadness: The Anatomy of Depression, London: Faber and Faber.
Yalom, Irwin, 11990, Existential Therapy, Basic Books, New York.
226
Conference
Acknowledgement : My initial interest in the ‘Loss of Sadness’ emerged while contributing 
an article for a memorial volume for Robert.C.Solomon—a pioneer of ‘emotion studies’. While 
the present article locates grief and sadness in a different context, of panic cultures, there are common 
thematic threads running through both articles. I wish to thank Kathleen Higgins for encouraging 
me to work on this theme and for accepting it for publication. Padmasiri de Silva, “The Lost Art of 
Sadness”, in K.Higgins, C.Martin, D.Shermon eds. Passion, Death and Spirituality: The Philosophy
of Robert.C.Solomon, Springer Publishers (Forthcoming).
Dedication.
This article is dedicated to the memory of Padmal de Silva, a distinguished psychologist, a pioneer in 
developing Mindfulness-based Behaviour Therapy, a versatile scholar and a friend with magnanimity 
and a compassionate heart. The last article that he sent me before his untimely death was on”Panic 
Cultures”, drawing from his research on the Tsunami experience in Sri Lanka. 
227
Slang, Freud and Buddhist Psychology: Clarifying the Term “Ego” 
in Popular, Psychodynamic and Spiritual Contexts
Deborah Bowman, Ph.D.
Professor of Transpersonal Counseling Psychology 
Naropa University, Boulder, Colorado, USA
The Latin term ego was ﬁ rst used in a translation of Freud’s work to refer to his idea of 
the “I” or the reality principle within the dynamic forces of the psyche. He suggests the functions of 
the “I” include reasoning, a sense of self-capacity and the mediator between the polarized demands 
of instinctual drives and societal expectations.  While he considered the “I” a mechanism of the self, 
he did not use the term ego.  Nevertheless the word ego entered the mainstream in professional 
conversations of the analytic understanding of the human being as it began with Freud’s thought.
As psychology became popularized the word ego entered the common vernacular to describe 
attitudes and behaviors considered selﬁ sh or inﬂ ated.  The slang use of ego is generally a derogatory 
term for behaviors considered out of the range of social acceptance.   Slang borrows from the inﬂ ated 
side of the psychodynamic description of the unhealthy manifestations of ego yet lacks a deeper 
understanding of its causes.  
In the 1970’s Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, a Tibetan lama, began utilizing the term ego to 
describe a neurotic process based on the ignorance of our actual situation (Trungpa, 1978) resulting 
in a solidiﬁ ed sense of self that is separate and self-referential and as such is the cause of suffering. 
He saw the projections of the ego as an incorrect understanding of the interdependent nature of reality 
and the primary obstruction to clear seeing and compassion.  He borrowed aspects of the term from 
both psychology and modern vernacular usage. 
Buddhists around the world have embraced this usage of the term ego and use it regularly to 
describe the common illusion of a static separate self that emphasizes it’s self-importance in relation 
to the world.  This Buddhist deﬁ nition can now be understood as a unique understanding of the word 
ego as well. The ﬁ eld of transpersonal psychology has borrowed from the Buddhist usage of the term 
ego in the psychological and spiritual mapping of human development.
The confusion that has arisen from the different usages of the term ego is signi ﬁ cant 
to those in the ﬁ eld of psychology as well as Buddhist practitioners who have an incomplete 
understanding of the word in its several contexts.  The general public would also beneﬁ t from a further 
understanding of the factors relating to the formation of an aggrandized sense of self to which 
the slang usage of ego refers.  
For a rudimentary understanding of the psychodynamic view of ego we must understand 
how it is one aspect of a trio of the major forces Freud delineated within the human psyche.  
Representing a self-part mostly but not entirely within conscious access, the egos job is to 
meet primary human needs by mediating between the forces of the id, or instinctual drives, and 
the superego, or the introjected societal injunctions coming from outside the person.

228
Conference
The ego is characterized by numerous functions including consciousness of self and 
the environment, knowledge of self-capacities and limitations, management of emotions, reasoning 
and logical thinking, continuity of self through space and time, social skills and character formation.  
As the term ego came into popular usage a common word associated with its slang usage is 
narcissism, also borrowed from the psychological literature.  A word made common in the literature 
by Freud, narcissism describes a spectrum of self-regard from healthy esteem to an overly 
aggrandized and entitled sense of self.  The slang usage connotes only the unhealthy end of 
the spectrum of narcissism perceived as self-absorption and a “me” orientation that disregards or 
uses others.  In clinical psychology the Narcissistic Personality Disorder (American Psychiatric 
Association, 1994) also refers to problems at the negative end of the spectrum of Freud’s original 
psychological deﬁ nition.
Problems to healthy ego development include a distorted sense of one’s capacities that 
are either in ﬂ ated or de ﬂ ated. Not understood in the popular discourse is the de ﬂ ated version of 
narcissism, a self-orientation characterized by an exaggerated perception of one’s smallness, 
victimization and incapacity to defend against the world. In this case individuals would consider 
themselves the “worst” rather than the “best” and use the qualiﬁ er as an attempt to garner negative 
or care-taking attention.  
The Buddhist concept of ego acknowledges the problems of distortion at both ends of 
the spectrum of unhealthy development yet sees these misperceptions inherent in the mistaken view 
of a permanent and separate self.  While acknowledging the importance of con ﬁ dence in one’s 
Buddha Nature, or capacity for compassion and wisdom, the Buddhist view is particularly wary of 
any conceptualization of a deﬁ nitive self.  Freedom from suffering, or health in the Buddhist sense, 
is derived from the deconstruction of the illusions of the ego as an autonomous and singular self in 
the world.  
This paper explores and compares the usage of the term ego in these three contexts across 
eight factors including identity, intra-psychic awareness, control, reality, relationship, empathy, needs 
and fear.  Healthy and unhealthy aspects of ego in the psychological and developmental sense are 
explored in relation to the Buddhist view of non-self and the problems associated to ego.  Contrast 
to the slang usage of the term ego is provided to clarify any vernacular misunderstandings.  Refer to 
the chart at the end of the article for an overview of ego in context of it use in slang, psychodynamic 
psychology and Buddhism. 
Identity
“He’s so egotistical.”  “She’s an egomaniac.”  “He’s such a narcissist.”  “She’s so inﬂ ated.”  
Psychological language has saturated the airwaves of our everyday conversation.  We label and 
“diagnose” others and ourselves with the slang version of these terms.  The diagnosis comes across 
as a judgment and hardens into an identity.  It is how we identify someone else or a part of ourselves 
we don’t like.  We believe the other thinks of him or herself as superlative and according to this 
slang system so does he or she.  The attitude is self-aggrandizing and inﬂ ates self-regarded traits as 
positive while downplaying or denying negative traits. 
Identity
229
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
The Buddhist use of the term ego describes an identity that is false yet deeply 
engrained and believed habitual tendencies.  While the qualities of inﬂ ation are not excluded in its 
deﬁ nition, Buddhism describes an overarching error in ego’s understanding of reality.  The error is 
an ignorance of our impermanence and interdependence. In ﬂ ation or deﬂ ation is a further spin on 
the misunderstanding of ego as an existent entity.  
The belief in an existent self lends itself to the problems of self-importance and self-derision.  
If we believe in an objectiﬁ ed existence than we are at once vulnerable to an objectiﬁ ed evaluation 
of that existence.  The ﬂ uid unbounded quality of interdependence is lost and our perceptual 
distortions are magni ﬁ ed when we falsely separate self and other.  A separate identity creates 
comparison and ranking as well as estrangement and a utilitarian view of personhood.  
The continuity of self critical to a psychologically healthy ego structure is understood from 
the Buddhist view as a relative function helpful in navigating a relative world. In the absolute sense 
the self is not permanent or real.  In a relative sense self is a mistaken view that increases suffering 
by ﬁ xing the individual in a static state. The “I” of yesterday and tomorrow is a ﬁ ction.  The “I” of 
today is a ﬂ eeting idea falsely extracted from a continuum of awareness. 
The seeming development of character or ﬁ xed traits, considered healthy in ego development 
is considered an obstruction to liberation in Buddhism.  If we conceive of our character as strong, 
an experience of weakness can be debilitating.  If we conceive of ourselves as humble, we remain 
unaware of an arrogant pride behind the self-conception.  Healthy self-regard in either system is based 
in a person’s actuality.  A relative understanding of one’s strengths and limitations in the Buddhist 
view is held lightly and subject to continual investigation that sees through any permanent view.  
Intra-psychic Awareness
Psychologically healthy adults are able to utilize the ego function to moderate between 
physiological drives and introjected societal injunctions. Healthy individuals are aware of thoughts 
and can modulate the inner voices representing different aspects of themselves.  Clinical interventions 
in psychotherapy enhance personal awareness of thoughts and emotions and often prescribe ways 
to modify the inner dialogue to increase well-being.  Somatic oriented therapies bring awareness 
to body sensations to help individuals map the source of emotions and the effects of thought on 
bodily experience.  
The ego of the psychologically unhealthy individual is likely to have poor or rigid impulse 
or superego control. Operating out of unconscious drives this person cannot ﬁ nd satisfaction in life 
without extreme manipulation.  A person with this wound to their ego development may reactively 
rage with no clue regarding the source of their behavior.  Another person with overly rigid 
boundaries might compulsively control all expression of emotion with no understanding of their 
ﬂ attened affect.  Labeled “clueless” in the popular vernacular, blame for lack of control or overcontrol 
is often projected onto others.
Buddhists have no quarrel with the utility of a function increasing the capacities of 
the intra-psychic sphere. It is suspicious of relying on a function that deﬁ nes itself as “I” and generally 
understands the “I” to have a vested interest in maintaining itself.  The “I” conspires to maintain 
the delusions of its unexamined beliefs and projects these onto the world.  
Intra-psychic Awareness
230
Conference
The practice of mindfulness is designed to increase awareness of mental activity and bodily 
actions without an “I”. Calm-abiding meditation creates a spacious platform within the psyche 
to better observe the mechanisms of the mind from a state of equanimity. Impartial seeing made 
available in a state of calm is void of the “I” and brings rest to frantic self-deceptive and defensive 
activities of the psyche.
The ego self-part of the psychological literature overlaps but is not necessarily similar to 
the Buddhist deﬁ nition of ego as an “I” identiﬁ ed self-part.  Psychological ego may operate out of 
a vested interest or not.  When it operates as an “I” to maintain itself it is the ego that Buddhists seek 
to dissolve through impartial examination.  
Control
The slang terms referring to the “bully”, the “princess”, and the “control freak” are obvious 
examples of individuals exhibiting controlling behavior out of a need to protect their self-interest.  
These stereotypes are driven by an in ﬂ ated sense of their capacity to manipulate events or others 
in their favor.  They would be considered to have a “big ego” or be “ego driven” in the popular 
vernacular and limited in their range of development in the eyes of psychology.  
The psychological perspective of the problems of control includes behaviors that are not 
so obvious.  The response to life with a weak ego structure is made narrow by attempts to limit 
the impact of anything from outside the self.  The controlling behavior appears less obvious and 
may include isolation, rigidity, conformity or codependence.  
A dichotomized self also limits inner choice where the ego function is unable to effectively 
mediate between the exaggerated forces of the superego and id.  Dictates or drives may dominate, 
oscillate in their domination or incapacitate the individual in a stalemate where he or she may feel 
stuck or tied up in knots.  
A healthy ego in the psychological sense has the capacity to regulate a range of needs that 
are both social and driven by basic survival and physiological functions.  Will power or control as 
a function of ego includes the capacity to forgo immediate pleasure for long-term goals.  Will is 
the energy the ego needs to be able to effect change in the world.  A healthy sense of will operates 
internally and self-regulation is optimized by a realistic sense of one’s strengths and limitations.  
The problem of control in Buddhist thinking stems from the false security created by 
an ego or “I” that believes it is in power. Control is an attempt to abate the basic underlying fears of 
safety, aloneness and unworthiness (Gyaltsen, 2009).  Buddhist practice seeks to enhance capacity 
for intention, focus, concentration, reasoning and choice yet the training of the mind cultivates 
an approach to life based on letting go of control.  On an outer level control implies clinging to 
a particular outcome and is an intrusive attempt to manipulate results.  On the inner level control is 
marked by confusion and division within the heart.  Compassionate mind training dissolves warring 
self-parts seeking command through the violence of self-control.
Conﬁ dence in the path to liberation is not attached to the look and feel of freedom.  Often 
seekers are quite surprised by the ordinariness of living openly and without habituated patterns of control. 
Control
231
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Relationship
Understanding the needs of self and other the psychologically healthy person cultivates 
a sense of give and take in relationship.  Social adaptation is an essential skill for meeting basic 
human needs.  The infant needs consistent human warmth and contact to survive.  Mirroring, 
the reﬂ ection back to the child by a caregiver of the child’s emotional state, provides afﬁ rmation of 
the child’s experience.   
Children naturally reciprocate mirroring early in their development and in 
nurturing relationships experience a deepening of connection and mutual exchange with others.  
Later development includes learning to respect the boundaries and differing needs of self and other.
When there are traumatic interruptions or aberrations in bonding the self-other boundary is 
confused and relationship skills are blunted.  A child cannot properly “hatch” (Mahler, 1973) and 
experiences insecurity in both autonomous and intimate functions.  Closeness and aloneness are 
both experienced as threatening to the weak ego structure.  Carrying over into adulthood others are 
experienced as an extension of the self, used to shore up a sense of inadequacy or seen as unavailable 
or rejecting.
The nomenclature of slang labels a category of behaviors indicative of this narcissistic 
wound as sel ﬁ sh or self-centered.  The individual who has not been adequately mirrored (Miller, 
1981) continues to seek the missing element of their childhood by constantly seeking attention and 
goods from others.  Development is arrested at a stage where it was necessary that others served 
their needs before the child learned to reciprocate.  Other manifestations of this wound to the ego 
are not described in the popularized use of the term narcissism.  They include but are not limited to 
the mental health problems of social isolation, low self-esteem, addiction and depression.  
The Buddhist concept of interdependence informs our understanding of relationship and 
the natural reciprocity inherent in all of life.  While a psychodynamic perspective understands 
the autonomous development of the individual as a necessity, Buddhism points to the danger of 
the extremes of self-suf ﬁ ciency creating a false sense of “I.” This “I” or ego manipulates and 
misperceives self and other.  
Suffering in relationships stem from the extremes of independence and dependence.  One 
is marked by the painful experience of isolation and the other is an immature fusion where our 
demands on others do not reﬂ ect our chronological age.  Learning to walk the interdependent path 
begins with the practice of attending to the present moment, seeing through the impermanence of 
past wounds and trusting the guidance of our teachers to mirror our yearning for compassion and 
liberation from suffering.  
The Bodhisattva V ow, to liberate others before oneself counters the tendency of the individual 
to attend to oneself and not the other.  From the Buddhist point of view we are all narcissistically 
wounded in clinging to the “I” and it’s delusional views and habits. This parallels the psychodynamic 
view of neurosis as a matter of degree (deSilva, 2010). Waking up requires the development of clear 
seeing and the reversal of painful self-centric patterns in relationship. 
Relationship
232
Conference
Empathy
Empathy is a powerful relationship skill that develops out of the mirroring process.  
When a parent makes a sad face to mirror her child’s unhappiness not only does the child receive 
understanding, the parent feels the sadness in his or her own face and has a direct somatic experience 
approximating the child’s state.  The capacity for empathy in the adult is enhanced and conveyed at 
a level the child can understand.  The parent feels with the child and not just for the child.  Putting 
oneself in another’s shoes helps to develop emotional intelligence. 
The psychologically wounded individual may be unable to enter the experience of another 
or may have difﬁ culty differentiating himself or herself from the other person if they do. The experience 
of loneliness or emotional entanglement can be heightened to intolerable levels.  
Lack of empathy commonly manifests in incorrect assumptions about others and 
the projection of disowned qualities onto the unknown other.  Without a feeling sense of the other, 
the ensuing experience of distance often leads to overly negative assumptions or projections.  
The emotionally immature parent may believe his or her colicky infant is rejecting the parent.  
The parent in turn rejects the child for “crying too much.”  If projection is active in the parent who 
has denied his or her own tears due to trauma or introjected beliefs he or she may label the child 
“bad” for crying.  The parents dissociated sadness or grief is projected onto the child and becomes 
the unconscious reason for pushing the child away.  
The emotionally conﬂ uent individual who is fused with others suffers confusion between 
the emotions of self and other (Perls, 1973).  The parent with this particular form of weak ego structure 
may assume the child’s state is a mirror of his or her own emotion.  If the child is angry, the parent 
is angry.  If the child is impatient, the parent is impatient.  Likewise the child may be expected to 
have the same feelings of the parent and when he or she does not, the child is rejected.  Parents may 
also assume the child is just like them and fail to see the child’s uniqueness.
Compassion is Buddhism is related to empathy as it is based in entering the experience of 
the other.  The Latin root of the word refers to having deep feelings (passion) with (com) another.  
Compassion implies a further response of an action to bring relief to the passion (suffering) of 
the other.  In this case passion is understood as the impossible desire to escape “what is.”
A compassionate response can pierce the ego-encasement that an individual has built to 
protect him or herself from pain.  Compassion acknowledges and accepts loss and other feelings 
imagined as too big to bear.  Compassion understands the ultimate boundarylessness of experience 
and the natural exchange continuously occurring between all beings.  
In the Buddhist view any wall created to protect the self from others is the creation of ego 
or a false sense of self.  At the same time Buddhism does not deny the uniqueness or the different 
experiences of each human being.  The task to hold both relative and absolute understanding of self 
and no-self is embraced on the path of liberation.  
Empathy
233
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Needs
Needs are understood as normative in the psychologically healthy individual.  Marshall 
Rosenberg lists basic categories of needs including physiologic, interdependence, choice integrity, 
contribution, spirituality and celebration (Rosenberg, 2008).  The psychologically healthy person can 
satisfactorily meet needs and with increasing maturation tolerates frustration and delayed gratiﬁ cation.
Disruptions to healthy ego development create exaggerated responses to needs.  
The narcissistic personality attempts to gratify needs in ways that distorts self-perception and will 
eventually hurt relationships. The gratiﬁ ed narcissist is successful in procuring an excess of emotional 
or physical “goods”.  The ungratiﬁ ed narcissist is unsuccessful in meeting needs and remains focused 
on a dissatis ﬁ ed state often at the cost of learning the skills to procure life’s necessities.  Both 
the gratiﬁ ed and ungratiﬁ ed person is considered ﬁ xated in an unhealthy manner on the objects of 
their desire. Extreme states of ﬁ xation have obsessive or compulsive qualities.  
Slang terms referring to the individual who appears to be overly gratiﬁ ed include “greedy”, 
“stingy”, “self-satisﬁ ed”, “gluttonous” or “entitled”.  These individuals are considered to be oriented 
to their own needs at the expense of others.  The ungrati ﬁ ed person may be considered a “suck”, 
“desperate” or a “loser”.  
Buddhists can understand the universality of needs by reﬂ ecting on those that are provided 
by the three jewels of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.  Within Sangha we ﬁ nd our needs met for 
acceptance, contribution, support, warmth and honesty.  The Dharma meets our need for truth and 
clarity.  The jewel of the Buddha fulﬁ lls our need for guidance and inspiration (Bowman, 2009).  
The Buddhist view also focuses on the problem of desire driving a constant craving for 
external objects and experience.  The focus on personal needs rei ﬁ es the “I” and re ﬂ ects an ego 
driven state of continual discontent.  The cessation of desire is primary to the path of liberation from 
suffering.  Any clinging to self or other fosters dissatisfaction with life and an inability to accept 
the impermanent nature of all things.  The acceptance of interdependence appreciates the play of 
exchange without clinging to needs, strategies to meet needs or an expected outcome.  
Fear
The healthy person learns to manage fear and dif ﬁ cult emotions in daily life situations.  
To varying degrees of success psychotherapy addresses individuals who have been exposed to 
traumatic events that cause disregulation in the fear response.  While the healthy person can tolerate 
ambiguity, repeated or high levels of traumatic experience can impair ego functioning that 
moderates eternal stimuli and internal thoughts and imagery.  Individuals who suffer from Post 
Traumatic Stress Syndrome (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) are easily triggered by 
situations that may appear innocuous yet are associated to earlier harmful or violent events.
Fear
Needs
234
Conference
The child who is subject to isolation, enmeshed boundaries and less traumatic levels of 
abuse also experiences higher levels of anxiety than normal when performing developmental tasks 
requiring increasing social or autonomous skills.  An overly defended ego stance can result in 
the formation of an adult persona that presents as fearless and brash.  This personality will likely 
respond with aggression when threatened.  
The person with an ego that is overly porous may present as engulfed in fear at the slightest 
threat.  This person responds with a range of reactive behaviors including hostility, submission or 
retreat from life.  The retreating individual may hide in compulsive activities or signi ﬁ cantly limit 
contact with others or challenging events.  Some individuals retreat into a superior attitude that in 
effect limits contact with others. 
Slang addresses a narrow range of dysfunction related to fear.  The fearless “as if” 
personality is labeled “cocky”, “brazen” and “swaggering.”  The individual is referred to as “puffed 
up”, a Donald Trump type.  At the other end of the spectrum the person presenting as intellectually 
or culturally superior is considered “aloof”, “condescending”, a “know-it-all” or “conceited.”  Slang 
fails to acknowledge the wound behind these behaviors.  
Buddhism sees the construction of an “I” as the basis of a fear driven response to 
the impermanent and unpredictable nature of life.  The “I” or ego gives the illusion of stability and 
becomes something to protect and defend.  While not always within the diagnostic range of clinical 
psychology this “I” limits the individual’s capacity to respond to the fullness of life or experience 
the freedom that is possible.  Liberation from suffering is liberation from fear.  
Existential anxiety is considered normative in the psychological view yet the path of healing 
described in Buddhism seeks to undercut the root of all anxiety.  Ponlop describes existential fear 
as the subliminal panic that is all-pervasive in every living heart (Ponlop, 2007).   The universal 
mistake of clinging to an “I” is addressed in learning to attend with relaxation to moment-to-moment 
experience and the investigation of the truth of that experience.  Calm-abiding developed in meditation 
is the basis for the discovery of an unbounded reality free of the shackles of ego-clinging and the fear 
states ego induces.
Freedom from fear is also the freedom to work with fear as it arises and passes in awareness.  
True liberation embraces the paradox of our relative and absolute knowing of any experience.  
We understand fears inherent nonexistence when we are able to extinguish our attachment to its 
appearance.  As we follow its arising and falling we learn to see through our mistaken beliefs in its 
solidity. We do not have power over fear nor does it have power over us.  Paradoxically complete 
acceptance of fear creates the spaciousness in our lives that offers complete peace as well.
Reality
Reasoning and conceptual thinking are considered cornerstones of the psychologically 
healthy ego structure. In order to function in society a person must understand and work with 
the consensual reality of their culture including an orientation to time and space. 
Reality
235
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Cognitive therapies emphasize working with thought processes to assist individuals in 
managing emotions and reducing distorted thinking that contributes to depression and other 
psychological problems.  The healthy individual has developed an internalized conceptual structure 
that is able to prioritize and make value decisions grounded in reality.  
A workable orientation to consensual reality includes the understanding and acceptance of 
basic social codes that make civil discourse and interpersonal relationships possible.  The health of 
a society is affected by the degree of human considerations in those social standards and the role 
they play in the development of the superego in its individual members.  Overly rigid family and 
societal standards make for a harsh inner critic with low tolerance for differentiation from a narrow 
range of acceptable behavior. A rebellious attitude is the converse side to the critical inner voice 
and may or may not be acted out. Confused or lax standards contribute to an ego structure that is 
unable to manage the conﬂ icting demands of instinctual drives and internalized societal messages.
Slang refers to the individual with a grandiose perception of their place in the world as 
“arrogant” or “God’s gift to the world.” “She thinks she is the center of the universe” or “he acts like 
the world rotates around him” would be phrases used to refer to someone who misperceives their 
importance in relation to others and bends consensual reality in their favor.  
The individual who acts as if they can defy physics or the basic rules of traf ﬁ c is called 
“deluded” and “grandiose”.  The “egomaniac” is considered out of control and others might say, 
“He believes he is immortal” or “she thinks she can defy death.”  All of these slang terms refer to 
a lack of a reality orientation combined with an inﬂ ated ego.  The individual with an extremely weak 
ego structure and severe delusions may be called “psycho” or “crazy.”  Even the person who has 
difﬁ culty organizing life’s details or thinking logically through problems is considered a “mess” or 
“haywire.” 
Buddhists understand the underlying tenants of consensual reality as deluded.  Society fos-
ters the mistaken belief in an existent self and other.  This belief induces a sense of self-importance 
or that “the world is my oyster.”  Reality in the Buddhist view is empty of anything considered 
singular, independent or permanent, concepts that contribute to the misperception of one’s 
immortality or fear and denial of death.  
The non-dualist view of reality cuts through the delusion of a separate self rei ﬁ ed by 
the social constructs inherent in language.  Conceptual thinking obscures an accurate perception of 
reality by dividing it into pieces that can then be arranged to ﬁ t an agreed upon consensual reality 
or create an even more deluded one. While logic is not abandoned in Buddhist thinking and actually 
encouraged in the practice of investigating reality, it is used to point to an understanding that is free 
or empty of concepts.  This nondual view is considered the basis of liberation from the suffering 
created by ego’s attachment to a false reality centered in “I.”
236
Conference
Conclusion
Psychology’s limited understanding of human development as culminating in healthy ego 
functioning reinforces the mistaken belief in the “I” as substantial and driven by psychosocial needs 
and desires.  The view of psychology colludes with culture in reifying the permanence of what is 
impermanent, the ever-shifting self-image that solidi ﬁ es when we generalize our experience into 
categories such as “good” and “bad” or “you” and “me”.  While psychology has much to offer 
individuals who suffer from serious problems related to interruptions in the developmental cycle, it 
does not the address the suffering that ego-identity and ego-clinging creates for all of humankind.  
It is helpful to address wounds to the healthy development of the psychologically de ﬁ ned 
ego before or while engaging in meditation practices to see through the illusions of the “I” in 
the Buddhist sense.  The adage that “You have to be somebody before you can be nobody” (Engler, 
1986) is relevant here.  The relative sense of an identity and constancy in relationship are necessary 
starting points for the disciplines of concentration and investigation that are utilized to uncover 
the insubstantiality of self and the objects of the world.  
The person with an ego that is not adequately differentiated from the other does not have 
the ability to witness its internalized other.  Self-re ﬂ ection is a danger zone for individuals with 
a stunted capacity to manage harsh introjected superego voices or impulses of the primitive drives 
of the id.  The capacity to maintain a neutral awareness and not be caught or ﬂ ooded by the contents 
of awareness is marginalized by varying degrees.  In this respect the development of the inner 
witness is understood as an ego function that is a precondition to the collapse of the self-other divide 
representing a deeper state of knowing in Buddhism.
When the understanding of self in the world is too strong or not strong enough these distorted 
perceptions increase clinging to the objects of the world to either enhance in ﬂ ation or shore up 
a deﬂ ated sense of self.  This attachment decreases one’s capacity to delay gratiﬁ cation and increases 
misperceptions that unchecked desire drives.  When the ego function of self-constancy is low 
insecurity makes meditation difﬁ cult to impossible to practice. When the correlating ego function 
of other-constancy is wounded it is difﬁ cult to hold any object in awareness without unmanageable 
levels of fear interrupting the process. 
The problem of ego bashing in popular discourse becomes a super-ego function void of 
compassion or deeper understanding of the wound beneath the self-centric pattern.  While the use 
of derogatory labels may function as norm setting for a culture, they provide no assistance to 
the individual to correct the dysfunction.  Labels given to others or to oneself typically create further 
division in relationships or increase self-hatred.  
In Buddhist circles ego bashing may have a similar yet subtler superego function.  On one 
level when we disregard the developmental necessity of certain psychodynamic ego functions we 
fail to acknowledge their importance on the path to liberation. This failure can impede progress 
when serious wounds to the development of a sense of self make it dif ﬁ cult to release that self.  
The insecure self, whether puffed up or dejected, adheres to anything in fear of annihilation.  Without 
addressing the relative value of the self-functions, void of extraneous and distorted ideas about that 
self, one cannot progress along the path.  
Conclusion
237
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
When Buddhists say ego is the problem it is important to notice that there may be a subtle 
quality of the superego talking down to the ego.  When we name our ego as getting in the way of 
freedom we may be creating a label of distain that becomes solidiﬁ ed in our minds.  My “I” becomes 
bad, not something to look at with impartiality.  Any prior injury to a realistic view of our capacities 
and limitations is a precondition for further ego bashing even when it is dressed up in Buddhist 
terminology.  
Modern psychology has much to gain from Buddhism in the investigation of the self, 
its utility and problems.  Trungpa states that: 
When we talk about egolessness, that does not mean simply the absence of ego itself.  
It means the absence of the projections of the ego.  Egolessness comes more or less as 
a by-product of seeing the transitory, transparent nature of the world outside.  Once we 
have dealt with the projections of ego and seen their transitory and transparent nature, then 
the ego has no reference point, nothing to relate to.  So the notions of inside and outside are 
interdependent—ego began and its projections began.  Ego managed to maintain its identity 
by means of its projections.  When we are able to see projections as nonsubstantial, ego 
becomes transparent correspondingly (Trungpa, 1978).
Looking through the transparency of ego there is nothing to impede clear seeing and 
the compassion derived from this enlightened vision.  The work of withdrawing our habitual tendencies 
and projections is the path to the cessation of suffering.  While clinical psychology addresses many 
debilitating and erroneous patterns of projection, the methods of Buddhism address the root of 
projection itself.  
Viewing ego in the context of no referential point we begin to comprehend its relative 
signiﬁ cance to the development of an ultimate understanding of reality. Eighth century Zen poet 
Sandokai says, “Ordinary life ﬁ ts the Absolute as a box and its lid” (Suzuki, 2001).  Our ordinary 
understanding of “I” and “other” is the ground of our freedom and our ignorance.  Psychology 
helps us cut through the gross layers of our delusions; Buddhism offers us a clear path to extinguish 
suffering and experience the liberation that is our birthright.  
238
Conference
THE TERM EGO 
 IN CONTEXT 
SLANG: COMMON 
USAGE 
PSYCHO-DYNAMIC: 
UN-HEALTHY 
PSYCHO-DYNAMIC: 
HEALTHY 
BUDDHIST VIEW: 
PROBLEMS OF EGO 
BUDDHIST VIEW: 
EGOLESS-NESS 
IDENTITY 
Egomaniac, Egotistical, 
Narcissist inflated, 
aggrandizing,  “God’s gift to 
the world” 
Inflated or deflated, extreme 
(ex: hyper- masculine or hyper-
feminine) 
Continuity of self, formation of 
character structure,  Healthy 
self-regard 
A fixed & solid sense of self 
is illusion, character 
formation is neurotic, 
Mistaking the continuum for 
a self 
No self, confidence in basic 
goodness, boundaryless, 
impermanence, continuity 
of experience 
INTRA-PSYCHIC 
AWARENESS 
“Clueless” about inner life, 
impoverished inner dialogue 
Poor or rigid impulse and 
superego control, operates out 
of unconscious drives 
Ego moderates Id (drives) and 
Superego  (introjected societal 
injunctions), self-aware 
Self-perception is deceptive,  
Ego conspires to maintain 
delusional view of itself 
Mindfulness and meditation 
cultivates awareness and 
inner spaciousness 
CONTROL 
“Bully”, “Princess”, “Control 
freak”,  Inflated sense of 
capacity, exhibitionist 
Controlling or out-of-control, 
narrow response to life, Denies 
vulnerability 
Willpower to effect change, can 
regulate self, Realistic sense of 
capacity & limitations 
Control is ego clinging, 
habituated response, false 
security in sense of self 
Non-attachment,  openness, 
freedom, confidence in path 
to liberation 
KNOWLEDGE 
“Know-it-all”, “big-headed” 
Arrogant, Conceited,  “The 
world is my oyster”, egocentric 
Knowledge used for self 
protection, unaware of 
ignorance, projects self onto 
world 
Maximizes learning, reasoning, 
conceptual thinking, Works with 
consensual reality, grounded in 
the world 
Ignorance,  logic based on 
false premise of existent self 
and existent other, Buys into 
consensual reality 
Wisdom,  Open and non-
dual, nothing is singular 
independent or permanent, 
reality is “empty” of 
concepts  
RELATIONSHIP You revolve around “me”, You 
serve me”, self-centered, selfish 
Uses others to shore up self,  
others are an extension of self, 
unhealthy merging 
Aware of others, give and take, 
respects boundaries of self and 
other 
Ego creates separate self, 
manipulates, misperceives 
others 
Inter-dependent, vows to 
liberate others before self 
EMPATHY 
“Clueless” about others, 
Oblivious, Condescending, 
thoughtless, inconsiderate 
Incapable, projects unwanted 
self onto others, confluent 
Can put self in others shoes, has 
emotional intelligence, 
Inability to respond in 
present, idiot compassion is 
based on misperception that 
we can fix others 
Understanding of suffering 
gives rise to compassion, 
lovingkindness for others 
and self 
NEEDS 
Greedy, stingy, Selfish, 
Self-satisfied, gluttonous, 
entitled 
Gratified or ungratified 
narcissism, oral fixation, 
neurotic 
Can meet needs, tolerates 
frustration 
Desire driven, constant 
craving is unquenchable  
Cessation of desire, free of 
craving, sees life as an 
exchange 
FEAR Cocky, brazen, swaggering, 
brash, Sees self as immortal 
Fearless “as if” persona or 
engulfed in fear, defensive,  
Denies death and/or extreme 
fear of death 
Manages fear and difficult 
emotions, tolerates ambiguity, 
Existential anxiety is normative 
experience 
Fear driven, aggressive to 
protect sense of self,  Denies 
and fears death, belief in 
permanent self 
Relaxation with moment-to- 
moment awareness, Death 
as opportunity for 
awakening  
239
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth 
Edition. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
Bowman, Deborah. Buddhism and Nonviolent Communication: An Effective Practice for 
Peace.  Buddhist Approach to Political Con ﬂ ict and Peace Development. Thailand:  
The International Buddhist Conference on United Nations Day of Vesak Celebrations, 2009. 
deSilva, Padmasira.  Buddhist and Freudian Psychology. Victoria, Australia: Shogam, 2010. 
Engler, Jack. Transformations of Consciousness: Conventional and Contemplative Perspectives on 
Development. Boston: New Science Library, Shambhala. 1986. 
Gyaltsen, Tenpa.  Lecture. Nalandabodhi Dzogchen Cottage, Boulder, CO.  December 5, 2009.
Mahler, S. and Pine, M.M. and F., Bergman, A. The Psychological Birth of the Human Infant, New York: 
Basic Books, 1973.
Miller, Alice. The Drama of the Gifted Child: The Search for the True Self.  USA: Basic Books, 
1981.
Perls, Fritz.  (1973).  The Gestalt Approach and Eye Witness to Therapy.  CA: Science and Behavior 
Books, Inc.
Ponlop, Dzogchen.  The Life of the Buddha and the Spiritual Journey: Introduction to Buddhism 
100 (Nalandabodhi Study Curriculum).  Seattle: Nalandabodhi, 2007.
Rosenberg, Marshall.  Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life.  CA: PuddleDancer Press, 
2003.
Shunryu Suzuki. Streams Flow in the Darkness: Zen Talks on the Sandokai. CA: University of 
California Press, 2001.
Trungpa, Chogyam. Glimpses of Abhidharma.  Boulder, CO: Prajna Press, 1978.  
References
240
Other-Centered Approaches: 
Psychotherapy and a Buddhist Paradigm
Caroline Brazier1
Modern psychotherapy has, to a large extent, developed within the context of Western 
culture and values, and has itself supported and affected the development of Western culture over 
the last half century (Furedi 2004 2). Buddhist psychology is grounded in an Eastern religious and 
ethical paradigm (Harvey 20003) and, whilst incorporating a diversity of theory on speciﬁ c issues, 
is broadly distinct from Western perspectives in a number of signi ﬁ cant respects, particularly in 
relation to the view of the self, of the human condition and of the nature of therapeutic growth. As such 
it offers a vantage point from which to elaborate and sometimes critique some of the assumptions 
of Western therapeutic models. 
Buddhist psychology (Brazier C 20034) has spawned a number of therapeutic models, which 
differ from one another in various respects. Some draw more on Buddhist practice such as meditation 
or mindfulness (Kabat-Zinn J 19915), whilst others draw to a greater extent on the Buddhist theoretical 
understanding of mental process (Brazier D 1995 6). In either case the use of Buddhist ideas does 
not necessarily guarantee that the therapy will support a Buddhist paradigm. Buddhist ideas and 
methods may inﬂ uence the, often unconscious, assumptions which underpin the therapeutic process 
or may be used to serve a more Western value system. 
Among the models derived from Buddhist psychology are approaches which rely upon 
the Buddhist understanding of the individual identity as the product of a set of conditions, reliant 
upon, and existing in relation, to others. In particular such approaches view the self as dependently 
originated (Jones 20117), constructed on the basis of object-related perception (Brazier D 1995 8). 
These approaches can be termed other-centered9 and include approaches such as Naikan and Morita 
(Krech 200110), both developed through Japanese Buddhist traditions, and the Other-Centered model 
(Brazier C 200911) developed at the Amida center in the UK. 
This presentation will explore the importance of the Other-Centered paradigm in offering 
an alternative perspective to the prevailing value system found in psychotherapies in the West, which 
often tends towards individualistic viewpoints. It will include a summary of the basic principles of 
different Other-Centered Approaches and their relationship to Buddhist psychology.  
1  (BA, PGCE, M Phil, BACP Acred) is course leader of the Amida Psychotherapy Training Program  and author of six 
books on Buddhism and psychotherapy. She travels internationally giving workshops and presentations. 
2  Furedi, F, 2004 Therapy Culture Routledge
3  Harvey P 2000 An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics Cambridge University Press
4  Brazier C 2003 Buddhist Psychology Constable Robinson
5  Kabat-Zinn, J, 1991 Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of Your Body and Mind to Face Stress, Pain, and 
Illness Delta 
6  Brazier D 1995 Zen Therapy Constable Robinson
7  Jones D 2011 This Being that Becomes; The Buddha’ s Teaching on Conditionality Windhorse Publications
8  Brazier D 1995  Zen Therapy Constable Robinson
9  Brazier C 2003 Buddhist Psychology Constable Robinson pp236-253
10  Krech G, 2001 Naikan: gratitude, grace, and the Japanese art of self-reﬂ ection Stonebridge Press
11  Brazier C, 2009 Other Centered Therapy: Buddhist Psychology in Action O-Books

241
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Buddhism on a Postcard
The other-centered therapeutic approach, as taught on the Amida psychotherapy training 
program, is grounded in the core teachings of Buddhism. Since several of these teachings are open 
to differences of interpretation, I will set out here the model as we interpret it in this context. Whilst 
there is not space in this paper to argue all the points of controversy, I will indicate sources to which 
the reader may refer for further clariﬁ cation.
The Buddha reputedly gave 84,000 teachings but, in fact, his presentation of the Dharma 
can be understood as a whole, that is as one integrated model. It is a system of thought which offers 
an analysis of human process and which explains how mental problems arise. The Buddha’s teaching 
is summarized by the oft quoted assertion that he taught suffering and the end of suffering (Sutta 
Nipata12), or, more accurately, the ( nirodha) containment of that which arises from suffering 13. 
The Buddha’s core message is also summarized as consisting of insight into Dependent Origination 
and the conditioned nature of existence (Jones D 2011 14). These two teachings are in fact the two 
faces of the one central message of Buddhism.
In brief then, the Buddha taught that afﬂ iction was an unavoidable truth (Brazier D 199715). 
He taught that in response to afﬂ iction, we cling to things. Our energies are aroused by grief or anger 
(ibid16) and we experience craving which we satisfy through our attachments, and it is on these that 
the sense of self and of the world depends. In other words, in our attempt to dissipate the discomfort 
of afﬂ iction, we are drawn into compulsive clinging and from it construct all that we think we know. 
Attachment and the process of self-creation
The teaching of the second Noble Truth, samudaya, describes this process. Clinging begins 
with sense attachment ( kama) then progresses to ‘becoming’ (bhava), or the creation of the self. 
Finally, if the sense of self fails to offer suf ﬁ cient comfort and security, the person falls into 
non-becoming (vibhava) or self-destructiveness (Samyutta Nikaya17). We can see this process in the 
example of the drinker, who starts by dissipating anxieties through the sense activity of enjoying a 
glass of wine. Gradually this person starts to identify with favorite drinks and progresses through 
identities of social drinker, wine buff to alcoholic, each with its associated ‘objects’ of particular 
alcoholic drinks, settings and companions. Eventually when life becomes overwhelming he starts 
to drink himself into oblivion. In most cases the progression is more complex and we all build our 
identities on idiosyncratic combinations of objects. Basically, however, Buddhist psychology can 
be seen as a psychology of addiction; addiction to the supports of identity.
This is the unenlightened process whereby humans become psychologically enmeshed in 
a self-world. Identity formation is a protection from the experiencing of afﬂ iction and impermanence. 
It is also a barrier to enlightened perception. 
12  Sutta nipata
13  See Brazier D 1997 The Feeling Buddha Constable Robinson pp89-96
14  Jones D 2011 This Being that Becomes; The Buddha’ s Teaching on Conditionality Windhorse Publications pp16-17
15  Brazier D 1997 The Feeling Buddha Constable Robinson
16  Ibid pp63-66
17  Samyutta Nikaya 61.11.6
Buddhism on a Postcard
Attachment and the process of self-creation
242
Conference
The self-world is mediated through our senses. The senses, known as the uncontrollables 
(shadyatana) because we do not really choose where they ﬁ x their attention, are each seen to possess 
a conditioned mentality ( vijnana). They lock onto objects 18 according to their conditioned modes 
of perception, or habitual preferences. The person thus repeatedly uses the same patterns of clinging, 
dividing experience into ‘mine’ and ‘not mine’ through attractive or aversive responses, and 
from them builds an illusion of permanence. This is identi ﬁ ed as the self. This understanding of 
the self-building process is elaborated in other core Buddhist teachings, namely those which describe 
the conditioned nature of the ordinary person, the Skandhas and the Twelve Links of Dependent 
Origination (Brazier C 200319).
Dukkha as the Source of Growth
Whilst Buddhism is sometimes portrayed as a negative philosophy grounded in a view that 
life is af ﬂ ictive and the only escape is through an ending of existence, this view is not borne out 
by the sutras. Far from offering a negative perspective, the Buddha appears to have seen afﬂ iction, 
dukkha, as a Noble Truth20 and as the root of the spiritual life. 
In the Sutta on Fear and Dread 21, the Buddha describes how, immediately prior to his 
enlightenment, he deliberately went into the forest to experience those places which frightened him, 
the shrines of demons and harmful spirits. He practiced in these places by developing steadfastness, 
and not allowing himself to be diverted from the experience of discomfort arising in him, but rather 
holding himself still as the feelings arose and waiting for them to dissipate. In other words, he did 
not retreat into the psychological diversions of sense attachment and self-building, nor did he walk 
away from the situation. He faced the arising emotions directly. This process led to his enlightenment 
experience which is described in the sutta immediately after his description of facing out the fear. 
As discussed in my recent book, Acorns Among the Grass (Brazier C 201122), the Sutta on 
Fear and Dread can be understood to support the view that the teaching of the Four Noble Truths, 
which was among the ﬁ rst teachings which the Buddha gave, is basically a description of how 
the practitioner can employ the energy which arises from life’s difﬁ culties as fuel for the spiritual 
path (Brazier D 199723). This interpretation is rather more positive than the traditional interpretation 
which sees the teaching as concerning the elimination of dukkha, which in any case, the Buddha 
evidently did not do 24. One can see the Buddha’s spiritual journey as centered on this discovery. 
It was initiated by an unwelcome encounter with afﬂ iction in his meeting with the four sights, and 
was resolved by his discovery that by facing fear and dread one can attain the ultimate spiritual 
breakthrough. This understanding was then formulated as the Four Noble Truths.
18  This is a powerful ‘locking on’ as for example suggested by the image of the axe and block used in the Ant Hill Sutta; 
Majjhima Nikaya 23
19  Brazier C 2003 Buddhist Psychology Constable Robinson
20  Or a ‘truths for noble ones’ to take Peter Harvey’s suggestion in Harvey P, 2009 The Four Ariya-saccas as ‘True 
Realities for the Spiritually Ennobled’- the Painful, its Origin, its Cessation, and the Way Going to This – Rather than 
‘Noble Truths’ Concerning These. in Buddhist Studies Review, V ol 26, No 2 (2009)
21  Sutta on Fear and Dread: Majjhima Nikaya 4
22  Brazier C 2011 Acorns Among the Grass: Adventures in Ecotherapy O-Books
23  Brazier D 1997 The Feeling Buddha Constable Robinson
24  As David Brazier points out, the Buddha got sick, was betrayed by those he loved and eventually died after his 
enlightenment.
Dukkha as the Source of Growth
243
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Thus Buddhist psychology encourages fortitude in the face of difﬁ culties and an attitude to 
life which seeks out the truth of situations rather than avoiding them. It emphasizes the importance 
of engaging with reality, however uncomfortable, rather than getting drawn into pleasantries or 
distractions.
Object related Identity
The Buddhist model of human process de ﬁ nes the self as an illusory, defensive structure, 
which is itself a source of af ﬂ iction25. Unless our psychological state deteriorates further into 
the nihilism of vibhava, the self gives us a semblance of order in a disordered world and acts like 
a protective bubble. 
The senses distort our relationship with the world, creating a personal world-view 
through their conditioned attraction to particular perceptual objects and their rejection of others. 
They reinforce our prejudices and con ﬁ rm us in our sense of self. In this way the identity mirrors 
the object world which we choose to inhabit. We seek out places and people who in turn support our 
self-view. Because they are driven by our latent fears and need for security, the senses are powerful 
as they seek out sense objects and the Buddhist texts are full of images which conﬁ rm the dangers 
which they pose26. 
The self is thus object related. It depends upon the maintenance of a distorted perception 
(rupa27) of objects and seeks out con ﬁ rmation of itself through its attraction to the familiar. 
The mind depends upon the object of attention and the self upon the object world which it inhabits. 
This relationship between the self and the world view is mutually conditioning. 
The Constructed Self
The teachings of the Skandhas and of the Twelve Links of Dependent Origination explain 
the mechanism by which the self is created and maintained. They can be interpreted as descriptions 
of the same basic cyclical process (Brazier C 2003 p183 28). Indeed these two key teachings share 
the four elements of vedana, samskara, vijnana and (nama) rupa. These four elements, if taken as 
a cycle, appear in the same relationship to one another. 
These common elements in the two teachings, then, are key points in a cycle which describes 
how conditioned perception (rupa) leads to attractive or aversive responses (vedana). These bring 
about the creation of new action traces (samskaras). This in turn reinforces the mentality (vijnana) 
which continues to seek out conﬁ rmation in new perceptual objects (rupas). Other elements of the two 
teachings elaborate different aspects of the cycle. In the teaching of the Twelve Links, for example, 
we see that as we name the phenomenal object (nama-rupa) we make contact with it (sparsha) and 
25  The skandhas are listed among the elements giving rise to dukkha in Samyutta Nikaya 6.11.5
26  The axe and block in the Ant Hill Sutta (Majjhima Nikaya 23) and the Fire Sermon (Aditta-pariyaya-sutta) give 
images of the power and passion of the senses.
27  Rupa, the ﬁ rst of the skandhas, describes the perceptual object. Although sometimes translated as form, the word has 
a primary meaning of coloration or phenomenal presence.
28  Brazier C 2003 Buddhist Psychology Constable Robinson p 183
The Constructed Self
Object related Identity
244
Conference
then the senses grasp the object, leading to the vedana.  Both the Skandhas and the Twelve Links 
are, however, basically descriptions of the same self-building process.
In the Ant Hill Sutta (Majjhima Nikaya 23) the skandhas are represented by the tortoise. 
This description suggests the self as a hard impenetrable shell with which we protect ourselves from 
those things in life which threaten us 29. The image of the tortoise ﬁ ts well with the idea of a cycle 
which perpetuates itself and defends us against uncertainty.
The processes of self-creation described in these core teachings offer an understanding of 
human process which can be applied at the collective as well as the individual level. Groups build 
identity based of shared objects of attention and world views in just the same ways as individuals. 
This process orientated interpretation gives additional support to our understanding of the ephemeral 
nature of the self. The self only exists in dependence upon the sense objects which give birth to it.
Other-Centered Approaches
The Buddhist understanding of conditioned nature of the ordinary mind provides a model 
of human process which is complex and subtle. Because all the Buddhist teachings can basically be 
linked to this same model, details which are found in different teachings can be used to elaborate 
and clarify aspects of it. In fact the core teachings are themselves presented in slight variations in 
different sutras, which seems to conﬁ rm their relationship to one another. 
This Buddhist understanding of mind can be used in practical ways to create interventions 
which will facilitate psychological change in therapeutic and other contexts. The teachings of 
the Skandhas and Dependent Origination suggest a number of different possibilities for intervention 
at different stages in the process (Brazier C 2003 30). Other-centered approaches tend to focus on 
interventions at the rupa/vedana  points. In developing a therapeutic model for the Amida 
Psychotherapy Training Program31, we have found that those parts of human process which relate to 
the world view are more amenable to intervention than those parts with which the person identiﬁ es 
(Brazier C 2001c32). People are more willing to question their perception of others than their sense 
of self.
Whilst people identify with their habitual behaviors and with the self-story which emerges 
from them, they are less identi ﬁ ed with their world view, despite the fact that it is distorted by 
the escapist and self-building agenda. It continues to be regarded as an accurate understanding of 
‘how things are’ and is not generally identiﬁ ed as part of the self. People may feel possessive of 
objects and can be defensive of them, but they are not generally aware of the extent to which their 
perception of them is clouded by self-interest. 
29  This interpretation seems to me more plausible than that offered in the commentaries which suggest that the tortoise 
represents the skandhas on the basis of having four limbs and a head. Were the commentaries right, one would have to 
ask if tortoises of the time were without a tail.
30  Brazier C 2003 Buddhist Psychology Constable Robinson ; Chapters 9-16
31  www.buddhistpsychology.info
32  The following therapeutic model is elaborated in Brazier C, 2009 Other Centered Therapy: Buddhist Psychology in 
Action O-Books
Other-Centered Approaches
245
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Other-centered models therefore rely upon examination of the conditioned nature of 
perception and on investigating our relatedness to others. This indirectly reveals the self-structures 
and invites the client to question and change them.  Changing the perceptual conditions changes 
the self which rests upon them. By focusing on the objects which are signiﬁ cant to the self-process, 
and implicitly or explicitly questioning the perception thereof, the reactive and associative responses 
are modiﬁ ed and the hold of the self-structure is loosened. 
In this process two aspects are assumed. Firstly, that the object is perceived in 
a conditioned way ( rupa) and, secondly, that the object has a real existence ( dharma), even if 
this cannot be directly perceived by the unenlightened mind. In addition to this understanding of 
perception, other-centered approaches also suggest that, since the object has a reality, it can be 
assumed that it will, of itself, exert some inﬂ uence on the interaction, independently of the perceiver. 
The ‘other’ will itself become an enabling factor in the process of change.
Other-centered work thus becomes an enquiry into relatedness. The mode of operation 
is one in which the therapist listens to the client and notices the signi ﬁ cant objects upon which 
the self-world is built (Brazier C 2009b 33). Initially she invites the client to talk more fully about 
these objects, which are often, but not always, people, and to see them in a more sense-based way. 
Their rupa quality is ampli ﬁ ed, intensifying the whole cycle so that it can be better understood. 
Thus the process of the Skandhas or Dependent Origination becomes more apparent in the therapy 
room, and the origins and dynamics of the conditioned view can be investigated and deconstructed. 
With this investigation, the client becomes less identiﬁ ed with the self-process. Understanding 
and recognition are common roots to dis-identi ﬁ cation in Buddhist practice. In many forms of 
meditation, the invitation to observe the arising and dispersion of mental factors is used to interrupt 
the self-creation process. Re ﬂ exive observation creates distance and renders the process itself 
a mind-object, and therefore an object of perception and a conditioning factor to self rather than 
an aspect of self. The observed self-element thus ceases to be part of the identity. The person comes 
to realize this is not mine, I am not this, this is not myself34.
More importantly, though, in other-centered work the client is then encouraged to enquire 
into the reality of the other. By bringing into question the immediate perceptual responses, the person 
develops curiosity and is invited to engage in a search for new perceptions. This other-centered 
enquiry is, of course, unlikely to release the person from conditioned existence within the therapy 
room, but it does create the possibility for a more ﬂ uid, multi-faceted world view to emerge, in 
which the habitual preconceptions are not taken as absolute. Space is created in which the other can 
be heard. As this happens, the identity is also naturally changed. Attachment to a ﬁ xed sense of self 
becomes less pressing.
Pureland Buddhism and Buddhist therapies
 All Buddhists schools are grounded in the same understanding of the nature of conditioned 
existence which was realized by Siddharta Gotama, the Buddha, founder of our shared traditions. 
Different schools of Buddhism differ in ﬁ ner details of doctrine, but more signiﬁ cantly in the practices 
33  Brazier C 2009b Listening to the Other O-Books
34  This phrase recurs in many of the sutras as the Buddha’s instruction to relinquish self-attachment.
Pureland Buddhism and Buddhist therapies
246
Conference
which they have adopted in response to this human predicament. Practices and approaches have 
been categorized in various ways, but a signiﬁ cant division, which grew out of the Indian philosophy 
of Nagarjuna35 and became particularly signi ﬁ cant in Japanese Buddhism, is that between what 
are known as self-power and other-power36. All Buddhist schools have some elements from each 
approach but in most one or other predominates. Whilst self-power schools emphasize effort and 
the capacity of the individual to achieve enlightenment, other-power schools emphasize faith and 
the need for reliance upon what is beyond the self. Other-power schools might be seen as primarily 
concerned with refuge.
Pureland Buddhism37 is an other-power approach. In this it places the locus of salvation 
outside the self, speci ﬁ cally in the bene ﬁ cence of Amida Buddha, literally the immeasurable 
Buddha38. It is a tradition which places its emphasis on faith. The practice of Pureland is nembutsu, 
calling the Buddha’s name. At its core is the recognition of our unenlightened nature, referred to as 
bombu39 nature, and of our dependence on others for our existence. 
Whilst its understanding of the conditioned nature of mind and the processes of self-building 
are in line with those already outlined in this paper, Pureland Buddhism offers two important 
additional qualities to the therapist. Firstly its emphasis on the locus of salvation being external to 
the self supports an other-centered approach in which healing is seen to come from the relationship 
with others. To accept this support requires faith. Secondly it emphasizes that salvation is not 
dependent upon our deeds 40  and that we are in ﬁ nitely karmically compromised 41. This position 
offers a radically non-judgmental value base. 
Faith in the therapy process
The path of faith can be understood in terms of the model already presented. The self is 
a constructed defense system, which is normally impervious to change due to its self-perpetuating 
cycle of conditioned perception and self-reinforcing reactions. An illusory phenomenon, the perceived 
world is separated from the reality which it masks by our clinging nature and the expectations which 
it generates. At the same time, there is acknowledged in the Buddhist texts, the unconditioned 42 
which exists beyond the conditioned experience of the ordinary person. This is the real world which 
we only intuit beyond our conditioned view. Beyond the world of conditioned existence, the self that 
is created on the sand of delusion, there is an immeasurable reality. It is in this that we place trust.
35  Pureland Buddhism recognizes Nagarjuna as its ﬁ rst patriarch based on his identi ﬁ cation of two paths to 
enlightenment, the Igyodo, the Easy Way, and Nangyodo, the Dif ﬁ cult Path, (Japanese terminology) in book ﬁ ve 
chapter 9 of his work
36  Tariki is the Japanese word for other-power. This term is contradistinguished from Jirki or self-power. The two terms 
are often applied to Pureland and Zen schools respectively.
37  Pureland Buddhism is widely inﬂ uential across Eastern Asia, but is particularly established as separate schools in Japan. 
These schools draw on the three Pure Land Sutras, The Greater and Smaller Pure Land Sutras and the Contemplation 
Sutra, for their doctrinal base. 
38  Amida is an amalgamation of Amitabha and Amitayus, and thus is Buddha of in ﬁ nite light and life
39  Bombu or bompu means literally ‘foolish being’ and is a term used widely in Pureland; see the Jodoshu web site: 
http://www.jsri.jp/English/Main.html
40  Shinran was radical in his emphasis of our powerlessness to affect our own salvation. For example Tannisho 3 he is 
famously quoted say saying ‘Even a good person can be born in the Pure Land, how much more so an evil person.’
41  ibid
42  The Udana speci ﬁ cally refers to the unconditioned
Faith in the therapy process
247
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Faith (shradha) is signiﬁ cant in all Buddhism, and is generally understood to signify faith in 
the Dharma. Faith should be distinguished from belief. The term ‘faith’ here refers to something more 
akin to trust or conﬁ dence. Faith allows us to live with impermanence and uncertainty, so is in some 
respects opposite to belief. It is trust in the teachings, the Dharma, which promise to help us do this. 
In Pureland, faith is expressed in our spiritual confidence in Amida Buddha’s 
unconditioned omnipresence. In the more general sense, faith is placed in an unconditioned reality 
beyond the clouding of avidya (ignorance; unenlightened view).  Thus in Pureland the emphasis is 
not on deconstructing the self-world, but on looking to the unconditioned that lies beyond it (Brazier 
C 200743).
Pureland accords particularly with the other-centered model in that it supports the premise 
that psychological health is a product of our openness to the presence of others rather than something 
which we construct.  This can be seen as a manifestation of faith at the mundane level. 
Mental health is a product of faith. Without faith the person experiences more fear and 
becomes more rigid. Self-building accelerates. Therapeutic process requires a foundation of faith, 
and it is the therapist’s con ﬁ dence in the possibility of healing which often inspires the client to 
change. This observation is reﬂ ected in the theory proposed by Japanese psychologist and Pureland 
priest, Gisho Saiko, who saw the therapist’s awareness of this external Dharmic foundation of 
support, represented by Amida’s presence, as instrumental in the efﬁ cacy of the therapy process (Saiko 
G 200144). Although the client arrived in a state of faithlessness, through the therapeutic encounter 
and through being held by the therapist’s faith, his own faith became restored. 
Gratitude and Dependence
Pureland Buddhism emphasizes our reliance upon others. Our existence is conditional 
upon many factors, all of which are ultimately beyond our control. Both Honen 45 and Shinran 46, 
the twelfth century founders of the Pureland schools in Japan, agreed that if we simply relied upon 
our own efforts and received what was due to us on account of our Karma, we would be destined 
for the hell realms47.
Some therapies which have grown out of the Pureland tradition therefore place their emphasis 
on recognizing our dependent nature and on the cultivation of humility, contrition and gratitude. 
Naikan therapy involves reﬂ ection upon the balance between what has been received and what has 
been given to others (Reynolds 1983 48; Krech 2001 49). This approach is radically different from 
the Western paradigm in reducing the sense of personal entitlement and increasing feelings of 
43  Brazier C 2009 The Other Buddhism O-Books chapter 4 
44  Saiko, G 2001 Dharma-based Person-Centered Approach in Japan  paper presented 8th International PCA Forum in 
Japan. 
45  Honen Gyojo-ezu chapter 32
46  For example Tannisho chapter 2
47  ibid
48  Reynolds D 1983 Naikan Psychotherapy: meditation for self-development University of Chicago Press
49  Krech G, 2001 Naikan: gratitude, grace, and the Japanese art of self-reﬂ ection Stonebridge Press
Gratitude and Dependence
248
Conference
appreciation and understanding for others. Taking place traditionally in a retreat format, more recently 
it has developed a number of guises including regular weekly sessions50 and on line programs51.
Guilt and non-judgmentalism
Whilst western therapies often espouse non-judgmental philosophies 52, in practice they 
are often embedded in a paradigm which values change, self-actualization 53, and the meeting of 
personal needs54. Whilst the client may be reassured of his worth and potential, there is sometimes 
an implicit avoidance of those areas of the client’s life and behavior which contradict this positive 
image. Without even realizing it the therapist steeped in the Western paradigm tends to 
reinforce values which are prevalent in Western culture55. Success is reinforced and dif ﬁ culties or 
unpleasantness explained away.
Other-centered work is grounded on the premise that people are inevitably fallible. 
The understanding of bombu nature releases client and therapist from the myth of perfectibility 
(Brazier C 2007 56) and guilt becomes an ordinary matter (Brazier C 2009b 57) to be recognized 
and not hidden. The therapeutic relationship becomes one of equality, or fellow feeling, in which 
the therapist is implicitly aware of her own bombu nature. 
Freed from the need to hide personal failings, the client loses one layer of defense. There 
is no longer a danger of punishment, so there is less need to protect the self. The client naturally 
begins to open to the therapist in ways that habitually would not have been possible, freed from 
layers of subtle dissimulation. 
Other-Centered Values and the Psychotherapy Profession 
This paper has outlined the basic structure of ideas in Buddhist psychology. It has explored 
a number of rami ﬁ cations of these principles for the therapist, and in particular has introduced 
the other-centered model as one example of a psychotherapy grounded in the Buddhist paradigm. 
In doing so it has introduced a number of concepts particular to Pureland Buddhism and shown how 
they relate to the broader context of Buddhist ideas.
Collectively, the other-centered approach offers a methodology and theoretical underpinning 
which is radically different from many other approaches available in the West. Whilst it would be 
naive to suggest that Western therapies all share the same value base, the other-centered model 
offers a critique of many ideas which are prevalent today and is suf ﬁ ciently different to offer 
50  As offered at the Nara Naikan Centre, Japan http://www4.ocn.ne.jp/~naikan/eng-05.html
51  http://www.todoinstitute.org/
52  For example Rogers C.R. 1951 Client-Centered Therapy. Constable, London
53  Rogers C.R. 1961 On Becoming a Person. Constable, London
54  Maslow, A 1954 Motivation and Personality Harper & Brothers New York
55  For an example of this see the discussion of ‘Brian’s vacuum’ in Brazier D 1995 Zen Therapy Constable Robinson 
pp 25-27
56  Brazier C 2007 The Other Buddhism O-Books chapter 3
57  Brazier C 2009a Guilt: an Exploration O-Books
Other-Centered Values and the Psychotherapy Profession 
Guilt and non-judgmentalism
249
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
a counterpoint to some of the accepted norms of the psychotherapy profession.  In particular, we 
can see differences in the following areas:
Western therapies tend to emphasize strengthening the self, and the sense of self entitlement. 
Whilst extreme caution should be exercised in comparing systems which may have radically 
different notions of what the self is, on this matter, other-centered methods, which focus the enquiry 
on others in the client’s life rather than on the client himself, are stylistically innovative. 
Other-centered understanding tends to be less centered on the individual. In the last ﬁ fty years, 
the West has seen society become increasingly individualized and divided by inequalities (Wilkinson & 
Picket 200958) with accompanying rises in consumerism, mental illness and addictions. As I have 
discussed at length in the ﬁ rst chapter of my book, Other-Centered Therapy (Brazier C 2009c59), 
therapy culture (Furedi F 200460) has been highly inﬂ uential in shaping society in this period so it 
is vital that we question the value base from which therapists are working. The Buddhist paradigm 
addresses many of these trends and in particular other-centered principles embrace the importance of 
the collective as much as individual progress, reversing the common trend. In broad such approaches 
can be seen to address issues of greed, one of the manifestations of self-building attachment at 
the social as well as personal level.
Buddhism is concerned with the question of suffering. As we have seen, however, it is 
possible to argue that far from being something to be avoided, dukkha is in fact a source of strength. 
This positive view of adversity does not lead to a loss of compassion, but it does bring an attitude 
of realism as, for example, we see in the Buddha’s own response to Kissagotami and Patacara 61, 
both of whom were experiencing extreme grief at the time when they arrived in his community 62. 
In modern society there is an increasing trend towards establishing controls and safeguards in 
the attempt to legislate against af ﬂ ictions of many kinds. The common out-cry that ‘it must never 
happen again’ leads to restrictions and regulations which themselves lead to difﬁ culties, yet humans 
are not omnipotent and disasters continue to happen. As we have seen, it can be argued that Buddhist 
teaching views the transformation of our reaction to afﬂ iction as the basis for spiritual growth. This 
teaching offers not only comfort, but also encouragement to face and transform painful circumstances. 
It takes us to the core of our human position and encourages us to live authentically.
In modern times, however, the teachings which are of greatest import are probably those which 
counter our tendencies to discriminate and judge. The radical non-judgmentalism of Pureland is so 
different from the predominating culture that it can seem shocking at ﬁ rst. Our culture is founded on 
assumptions that rights, justice and punishment are the basis of a healthy society. Western therapies 
do not necessarily ﬁ t their caricature of blaming parents and partners for all that is uncomfortable in 
the client’s world, but they do often promote, at least indirectly, attitudes of self-justiﬁ cation, seeking 
out culpable causes for current unhappiness in past experiences and the behavior of others. Clients are 
still encouraged to see themselves as damaged, survivors of traumas and victims of social and fam-
ily pressures. In this context, an approach such as that of Naikan which puts it emphasis on looking 
at the positive beneﬁ ts which we have received from others and on our own past failings can seem 
strikingly different. Accepting responsibility and recognizing our shortcomings is the foundation of 
58  Wilkinson R and Pickett, K 2009 The Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies Almost Always Do Better Allen Lane
59  Brazier C 2009c Other-Centered Therapy O-Books, Chapter 1
60  Furedi, F, 2004 Therapy Culture Routledge
61  Both described in the Therigata; see Murcott, S 1991 The First Buddhist Women, Parallax Press
62 . See Brazier C 2007 The Other Buddhism O-Books chapter 9 
250
Conference
psychological maturity. They are also essential to a world in social strife and environmental crisis. 
The Pureland view of bombu nature, as well as other Buddhist teachings on the human condition, 
offers methods to work with hate and aversion, the self-building attachments which grow from our 
collective lack of faith as we face our endangered situation.
In the appendix of his book Naikan: grace, gratitude and the Japanese art of self-reﬂ ection, 
Gregg Krech offers his own comparison between the traditional Western approach to therapy and 
that of Naikan. When I read this list, I felt a strong af ﬁ nity between this approach and that which 
we teach at Amida Trust. I would therefore like to ﬁ nish this paper by quoting his section headings 
from this appendix for mental health professionals.
1. Traditional: Focus on Feelings
2. Naikan: Focus on Facts
3. Traditional: Revisit how you have been hurt and mistreated in the past
4. Naikan: Revisit how you have been cared for and supported in the past
5. Traditional: The therapist validates the Client’ s experiences
6. Naikan: The therapist helps the client understand the experience of others
7. Traditional: Blame others for your problems
8. Naikan: Take responsibility for your own conduct and the problems you cause others
9. Traditional: The therapist provides analysis and interpretation of the client’ s experience
10. Naikan: The therapist provides a structured framework for the client’ s self-reﬂ ection
11. Traditional: Therapy helps clients increase self-esteem
12. Naikan: Therapy helps clients increase appreciation of life (Krech632001, pp197-205)
Namo Amida Bu
Pali Suttas
• Aditta-pariyaya-sutta The Fire Sermon 
• Majjhima Nikaya 23  Ant Hill Sutta;
• Majjhima Nikaya 4  Sutta on Fear and Dread:
• Sutta nipata
• Samyutta Nikaya 
• The Udana
63  Summarized from Krech G, 2001 Naikan: gratitude, grace, and the Japanese art of self-reﬂ ection Stonebridge Press 
pp197-205
251
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Mahayana Sutras
• The Greater Pureland Sutra
• Smaller Pure Land Sutras
• The Contemplation Sutra 
Japanese Pureland texts
• Tannisho (Yuien-bo)
• Gyojo-ezu  (Honen Shonin)
252
Conference
Bibliography
Brazier C 2003 Buddhist Psychology Constable Robinson
Brazier C 2007 The Other Buddhism O-Books 
Brazier C 2009a Guilt: an Exploration O-Books 
Brazier C 2009b Listening to the Other O-Books 
Brazier C 2011 Acorns Among the Grass: Adventures in Ecotherapy O-Books
Brazier C, 209c Other Centered Therapy: Buddhist Psychology in Action O-Books
Brazier D 1995 Zen Therapy Constable Robinson
Brazier D 1997 The Feeling Buddha Constable Robinson 
Furedi, F, 2004 Therapy Culture Routledge
Harvey P 2000 An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics Cambridge University Press
Harvey P, 2009 The Four Ariya-saccas as ‘True Realities for the Spiritually Ennobled’- the Painful, 
its Origin, its Cessation, and the Way Going to This – Rather than ‘Noble Truths’ Concerning 
These. in Buddhist Studies Review, V ol 26, No 2 (2009)
Jones D 2011 This Being that Becomes; The Buddha’ s Teaching on Conditionality  Windhorse 
Publications
Kabat-Zinn, J, 1991 Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of Your Body and Mind to Face Stress, 
Pain, and Illness Delta 
Krech G 2001 Naikan: gratitude, grace, and the Japanese art of self-reﬂ ection Stonebridge Press 
Maslow A 1954 Motivation and Personality Harper & Brothers New York 
Reynolds D 1983 Naikan Psychotherapy: meditation for self-development  University of Chicago 
Press
Rogers C.R. 1951 Client-Centered Therapy. Constable, London
Rogers C.R. 1961 On Becoming a Person. Constable, London
Saiko, G 2001 Dharma-based Person-Centered Approach in Japan  paper presented 8th 
International PCA Forum in Japan.
Bibliography
253
A Buddhist Perspective on Trauma: Understanding, 
Forgiveness, and Atonement
Barbara Wright, Ph.D.1
(Bodhicari Mettavihari)
Introduction
Over the centuries, a great deal of material has been written about the destruction, sorrow, 
suffering, and trauma that are experienced as the consequences of war, abuse, illness, crime, family 
strife, etc., and how it disenfranchises us from one another, drives us into emotional isolation, and 
makes us appear as less than human in the eyes of the other, be it the victim or the perpetrator.  These 
roles of victim and perpetrator can be assumed by individuals, families, cultures, races, religions, 
political ideologies, and nations.  They persist until there is a clear understanding and acceptance or 
Right View of what has transpired.  Until this is achieved, they always leave those involved outside 
the oneness of humanity, and under the cloud of pervasive fear. 
My ﬁ rst intention in writing this paper is to explore with the Metta Map how the Buddhist 
Principles of Right View and overcoming ignorance are critical in the treatment of trauma.  My 
second intention in writing this paper is to explore how our heart, our humanity, must be opened 
to all parties in this process of recovery if it is to be successful.  My third intention in writing this 
paper is to explore the integrated mental, emotional, and energetic transformations that occur when 
reconciliation moves into atonement through Right Action.  
As we traverse the squares of the Metta Map we will explore the multi-dimensional 
phenomena of the neurology and physiology of the body, and the mental and emotional releases 
that are concurrent in the process of healing.  This is a transformational progression, and is the key 
to releasing trauma and elevating the individual to a new state of being.   
This paper will demonstrate how the Metta Map can be a monitoring device for seeing 
clearly where one is in regards to staying on the Noble Eightfold Path, and a useful vehicle for both 
victims and perpetrators who wish to be released from the Triangle of Trauma (see illustration).
Trauma, as we are using the term, is expressed on the Metta Map when a triangle of events
is experienced as frozen, and is anchored in the square of “Time Stops.”  Tragedy and trauma 
become ﬁ xed in time through a variety of triangular conﬁ gurations and combinations of squares on 
the Metta Map.   By “anchor” we mean that the common denominator of any “triangle of trauma” 
is “Time Stops.” 
1  Draft edited by Dr. Stephen Long (Bodhicari Dharmapala)
Introduction
254
Conference
Illustration: Triangle of Trauma
Foundation of the Metta Map
The Metta Map was developed during my thirty-year career as a clinical psychologist and 
Buddhist practitioner.  The intention of the Metta Map is to provide a multi-dimensional tool for 
exploring and experiencing various elements of the Dharma in a multitude of applications.
The Metta Map has been used in a variety of con ﬂ ict resolution scenarios, including 
corporate, academic, judicial, family therapy, individual, youth gangs, populations with chemical 
dependencies, and others.  The Metta Map has also been used effectively with these populations in 
relationship to their perceived traumas and tragedies – versus situational challenges, which are also 
created through perception.  
In this paper, therefore, we will deﬁ ne “trauma” in two separate ways:  ﬁ rstly, as the sudden 
and abrupt assault on an individual, family, or organizational system such as an extended family, 
a business, a city, or a government.  This can come in the form of an auto accident, a personal attack 
such as rape, a fatal illness, the loss of a business, home, or life savings, or a military invasion. 
The second deﬁ nition, and the one most often neglected, is the insidious, prolonged insult 
and assault with a cumulative and deleterious effect, to an individual, family, or system.  For 
the individual, this can come in the form of chronic neglect, domestic violence and abuse, protracted 
poverty, or chronic illness.  For the group it can be the result of corruption in a corporate or 
governmental system that erodes the spirit of its community, or the occupation of a foreign invading 
military force.  Furthermore, in this second definition it is at the unique moment when 
the accumulation of this unwelcome intruder or collection of intruders reaches the nexus breaking 
point for the individual, family, or system that it actually becomes trauma or tragedy.  In Buddhist 
language, the circumstance has mutated from the impermanent process of normal life to a ﬁ xed 
sensation induced by the delusion of permanent reality.

255
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
The body of my presentation will explore how the Metta Map provides victims of both 
of these kinds of trauma and their coaches with the methodology for using it as tool to diminish 
the consequences of trauma, and to provide a path out of – or at least toward reducing – suffering.  
In the tradition of Buddhist Psychology, the signature elements of intention, impermanence, and 
compassion have been effectively incorporated into the Metta Map for use as a platform for teaching 
and transmitting the Dharma, as well as for mitigating the effects of negative life events.  The goal 
is to maintain the awareness and presence to life’s challenging circumstances, and to prevent falling 
into the abyss of a ﬁ xed negative life orientation, which then becomes the focus of identiﬁ cation as 
“self.”  For example, if one asks the question, “Who are you?” the answer might be: “I am a rape 
victim”; “I am a tsunami victim”; “I am a cancer patient”; “I am a refugee.” In these identiﬁ cations 
the person has lost the multi-dimensional reality of their humanity, and has attached themselves to 
the toxic or negative situation in which they ﬁ nd themselves – even though it is only one aspect of 
the whole individual.
While using the Metta Map, we identify three forms of intelligence.  Intelligence, as described 
in this system, is the way one takes in, processes, and expresses information. 
First, there is the level of Mind Intelligence, which is characterized by the cognitive 
manipulation of ideas and constructs that are intellectually received and processed, and are attached 
to ego. The knowledge of the mind is the essence of our shared reality.  (e.g. “We are all sitting in 
a large room.”) 
Second, there is the level of Heart Intelligence, which is characterized by emotional 
knowledge, the expression of which is energetically greater than intellectual knowledge.  Heart 
Intelligence is the essence of our humanity. (e.g. “Some of us may feel lost in a large room, and 
others may take comfort feeling the sense of community.”) 
Third, there is the level of Energetic Consciousness Intelligence, which is primal imprinted 
knowledge, the experience prior to language, the foundation of our experience, imagination, 
intuition, and the engine that empowers action, both internal and external.  Energetic Consciousness 
Intelligence is the essence of desire and creativity, and is the repository of karma. (e.g. “Being in 
this room is a physical expression of my conscious and pre-conscious commitments.”) 
When using the Metta Map, the intention is to illustrate how the person sees him or herself 
in all Three Levels of Intelligence at that moment in time.  The next step is to address the Map with 
a precise intention related to how or where they would ideally like to be on the Map.  It is with this 
intention that the individual navigates the Metta Map, either on their own or with the assistance of 
a mentor or coach. The goal is to chart the path out of their current circumstance or identity and to 
move towards their preferred place or condition.  In doing so, it is important to keep the Buddha’s 
Precept of not doing harm to one’s self or others, and to utilize Right Speech while expressing one’s 
self on the Map.  In this process we are cultivating Right View by getting more clarity and preparing 
for Right Action, which develops “Success by Approximation” while moving through the issues at 
hand.  In doing so, one will be more skillful dealing with conﬂ icts, both internal and external, thereby 
reducing stress levels, suffering, or traumatic conditions that inhibit the spaciousness of thought and 
emotion.  This skillfulness increases the array of possibilities for a more desirable outcome.  
256
Conference
The Metta Map is a sacred tool. When we use it, we need to approach it with purity of mind 
as well as a commitment to letting the process reveal the truth of the issue we seek to understand.  
Through this process we seek a reduction, resolution, or reconciliation to any identiﬁ ed conﬂ ict or 
trauma. 
The structure of The Metta Map is framed in a vertical and horizontal matrix with the Three 
Levels of Intelligence displayed on the vertical grid. This matrix of activity exists in a continual 
horizontal, vertical, and spatial ﬂ ow. It is like looking at a three-dimensional chess board or a cube.
Illustration:  The Metta Map
The horizontal components of the matrix are: Freedom, Action, Center, Doubt, and Rules. 
They represent a continuum that ﬂ ows from left to right, and also from right to left. This ﬂ ow 
expresses the movement of intelligence, with its ﬁ ve gradients, from a state of freedom and 
the absence of fear to one of constraint and rules driven by and sustained by fear. The ﬂ ow of 
the levels on the Metta Map can move in all directions, with the degrees of attachment to each square 
profoundly affecting the relationship an individual has to the situation or problem at hand. This 
attachment gives a dimension of depth to the square, which we may refer to in either percentages or 
degrees.  One’s relationship to each square can be either positive or negative, depending on perception.
 While looking at the Metta Map, the squares on the top, or Mind Level of Intelligence, are 
“I Have an Idea,” which represents Freedom of thought.  “Thinking About It Differently” is the Action 
of expressing that freedom.  The Center, “Understanding,” re ﬂ ects the knowledge of the idea and 
of how to think about it differently, and then the caution or Doubt that exists as we move toward 
the right hand side into the square of “Not Possible.”  When we get to the Rules column we reach 
“Rules,” which like every square can be either positive or negative; there are rules that are enduring 
and reliable, and there are rules that have become obsolete and restrictive.

257
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
When we come to the middle level of Heart Intelligence we start with the uninhibited state 
of the Freedom square of “I Believe.”  From this we move to the Action square, which is “Trusting.”  
The Center of the Map is “Compassion,” which moves into “Vulnerable” through Doubt or caution.  
On the far right side we ﬁ nd the square of “Emotionally Disconnected,” which is that state when 
the heart moves into the Rules of fear.  This may seem un-Metta-like; however, the wisdom of 
the heart is that there are times that in order to get Right View one must temporarily emotionally 
disconnect – not a place to stay too long, but sometimes necessary.
On the lowest row of the Metta Map, which is the Energetic Consciousness Level of 
Intelligence, the square on the far left in the Freedom column is when the energy is unbound and 
“The Sky is No Limit.”  You know you’re there because in Action “Time Stops.”  The Center square 
is “Commitment,” and the degree of commitment you have to anything is the engine, or the amount 
of energy you have that drives the whole process.  When in Doubt, one enters the “Defensive” square, 
and when moving into the Rules of fear we reach the square of “Zero Tolerance.”
Please note that the degree of commitment is represented by a three-dimensional or “depth” 
phenomenon/element to the Metta Map.  This is the level of attachment one has to any of the squares 
– from very little at 1%, to trauma at 70%, to total clinging at 100%.  The more attachment one has, 
the greater the suffering; this can range from a mild annoyance or irritation to a major sense of loss 
or sorrow.  This might be likened to the Buddha’s discussions about “extremes,” and avoiding them.  
We will demonstrate how this depth effect inﬂ uences the severity of trauma that is experienced.
The Four Noble Truths, the Metta Map, and Trauma
The Buddha’s First Noble Truth states that suffering (or stress) is an inevitable fact of life.  
The Second Noble Truth tells us that desire or attachment (or its opposite, aversion) is the cause for 
all suffering.  The Third Noble Truth informs us that there is a way to free ourselves from suffering.  
In terms of the Metta Map, we cognitively understand that some kind of stress is going to 
come into our lives no matter what, and with that there will be some degree of suffering.  This is 
the First Noble Truth.  
We use the term “Relative Continuum of Stress” to describe the spectrum of suffering we 
humans encounter that range from minimal to maximum, from one extreme to the other.  It goes 
from “A ﬂ y just landed on my arm” or “I don’t have the right shade of shoes” – to “My son was 
just killed in Afghanistan” or “My twelve-year-old daughter was kidnapped and sold into sexual 
slavery.”  This continuum is always subjective, and also applies to “I have a headache” all 
the way up to “I am paralyzed from the waist down,” which is traumatic.  In actuality, there is always 
something more on both ends of the spectrum; the experience can always be either mild or severe 
because stress is relative.  
In addition, what we consider to be traumatic at one time in our lives (“I didn’t get the job!”) 
can become completely irrelevant later on (as the eighty-year-old when she says, “Oh! I wish I could 
be sixty again!”).  Stress is never permanent, whereas one can stay ﬁ xed in trauma for the duration 
of this lifetime.  The Buddha said that suffering or stress is related to aging, sickness, and death (and 
the other clingings and aversions listed above in the First Noble Truth).  Each of these stressors is 
The Four Noble Truths, the Metta Map, and Trauma
258
Conference
inevitable, and any of them can lead to trauma; how successfully we manage them determines our 
quality of life, and our movement on the path to enlightenment.
One is never able to truly evaluate where another stands on the Relative Continuum of Stress.  
Looking from the outside, the trust-fund child appears to have it made; he is set up ﬁ nancially for life, 
and never has to work for a living.  These individuals are oftentimes the objects of envy by people 
who have less.  What can’t be seen from the outside, however, is that from the inside, any person 
without wholesome direction, purposefulness, and a meaningful life, entitled or not, can experience 
anguish and emotional isolation that can cripple or destroy him.  
On the other hand, one may see an ordinary, mundane person and feel pity for him because 
he appears to have very little.  But internally this person may experience meaning and purpose in his 
life, so that even with outward struggles there is joy and satisfaction.  External circumstances often 
signify nothing; appearances can be deceiving.  In my clinical practice I have had the opportunity 
to treat many young “trust-fund” adults who were in an existential crisis of meaninglessness, and 
who fell into drug addiction and suicidal ideation.  I have also treated young “trust fund” adults 
who were struggling as to how to be generous and still maintain a skillful management of their 
family’s estate.  With regards to material wealth, there is no predicting how it will turn out.  It is 
the individual’s cultivation of the Dharma that reduces one’s position on the Relative Continuum 
of Stress (or trauma) as he or she systematically eliminates attachments by progressing on the path.       
Using the Metta Map we see that stress, suffering, or trauma is a possibility that can exist 
in any of the ﬁ fteen squares.  Just because “I have an idea,” “I believe,” and “the sky is the limit” 
are on the side of the Map representing freedom, don’t be tempted to think that standing on these 
squares guarantees a free pass from suffering.  There can be just as much suffering from having too 
much freedom (anarchy) as there can be from having too many rules (oppression).
At some point in our lives – oftentimes on a daily or even an hourly basis – there are situations 
in which we ﬁ nd ourselves experiencing doubt (not possible), fear (rules), anxiety, vulnerability, 
defensiveness, emotional disconnection, or even zero tolerance.  Each of these is a stressor and can 
be a source of trauma:  whether it is going to work in trafﬁ c, having a boss who doesn’t understand, 
or an employee who doesn’t get the job done; spouses who don’t listen, taking care of sick children 
or parents, or not being able to afford a new car or food.  Taking any scenario to the extreme, 
it could be:  receiving orders in a combat zone that involve the inevitable result of “collateral damage,” 
which is the killing of innocent civilians; being driven from your home, as in Rwanda, and losing 
everything; or facing a child with a terminal illness.  The list is endless.  By acknowledging 
the existence of stress or suffering one then has the capacity to examine its source.  Notice that these 
stressors occur on all three levels of intelligence:  mind, heart, and energetic consciousness; either 
one at a time, in some combination, or perhaps all at the same time.
When we study the Metta Map we discover that a primary source of suffering comes from 
having rules about the way things should be – or shouldn’t be.  This leads us to the Second Noble 
Truth, which names desire or attachment as the origin of suffering; this means not having what 
we want, or not wanting what we have.  Any time we feel less-than or deprived or in-want-of we 
are trapped in desire.  If you notice, at any given moment there will usually be a certain feeling of 
“unsatisfactoriness” about the way things are; there is always something missing, or too much of 
something that doesn’t match up to our expectations.  All of these are impermanent conditions of 
suffering or stress, and can become the seeds of trauma.
259
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Studying and using the Metta Map we discover that there is a way out  of our suffering:  
the Third Noble Truth.  This is not just a false hope; this is a promise.  It is through introspective 
investigation that we come to an understanding about the nature of our expectations.  Through this 
inquiry we seek to develop skillfulness, compassion, and equanimity while moving from square to 
square on the Metta Map.  We discover that suffering can be, in fact, a gift which propels us to be 
courageous and imaginative in our inquiry, and keeps us seeking a way out until we ﬁ nd relief.  It is 
with these qualities that we cultivate insight through our three levels of intelligence – always coming 
back to our intention.  Having access to the Buddha’s Middle Path of understanding, compassion, 
and commitment, represented by the Center vertical column of squares, we can successfully traverse 
all of the squares as needed in the moment.
From the Buddhist Catechism by Col. H. S. Olcott, the Buddha divides Bodhisattas 
(spiritual aspirants on the path to liberation) into three categories that ﬁ t perfectly within the Metta 
Map system:  “he who attains least quickly is guided by intelligence ( mind); he who attains less 
quickly is guided by faith ( heart); and he who attains quickly takes the course of energetic action 
(energetic consciousness)”.  In regards to these three, Col. H. S. Olcott said, “The ﬁ rst is guided by 
intelligence and does not hasten; the second is full of faith, and does not care to take the guidance of 
wisdom; and the third never delays to do what is good.  Regardless of the consequences to himself, 
he does it when he sees that it is best that it should be done.”(1)  
The ﬁ rst aspirant develops least quickly because he is limited by only cognitive information, 
and does not access data coming in through the channels of heart and energetic consciousness.  
The second aspirant develops less quickly because he is limited by beliefs, and he ignores information 
coming in through the mind and his intuitive channels.  The third aspirant demonstrates the power 
of wholesome intention, which is the pre-verbal, driving force of the entire path; he has successfully 
integrated all three levels of intelligence in order to act appropriately and effectively in the moment, 
and he is unattached to the delusionary spell of ego, whether it be driven by mind or faith.     
Let’s pause for a moment, breathe, and explore some of these insights on the Metta Map.
Looking at the First Noble Truth, we see that rules often make us view things as not 
possible, which can perpetuate stress and lead to trauma.  When one goes into understanding he 
or she might be able to think about things differently, which can raise the possibility of reducing 
the stress.  Keep in mind that many rules are narrow and restrictive, therefore, they cause stress.  
It is only by broadening one’s limited thinking that new information can arrive and lead to a new idea, 
which may offer relief for the stressful situation.
 We will ﬁ nd through understanding that there are rules that are skillful and helpful, 
while there are others that have out-lived their usefulness.  For example, the rule that a four-year-old 
child can’t cross the street by himself may be limiting to the child, but it is there for the child’s safety.  
An adult, however, is perfectly capable of crossing the street alone, so this rule has become obsolete 
for the adult.  In the case of the child, this rule might cause situational stress, but to the parent it is 
a comfort.  In other words, rules are generally relative depending on setting, context, and wisdom. 
An understanding that suffering or stress is inevitable can lead to compassion for yourself 
and others.  Knowing that all sentient beings share in this phenomenon, the delusion that it is only 
you that is suffering disappears; this can be a great relief.  In fact, how you relate to the universality 
260
Conference
of suffering determines the degree of acceptance you can have of the suffering you encounter, as 
well as the suffering of others.  Acceptance at that moment is an empowerment to creativity, and 
has nothing to do with tolerating or condoning unwholesome situations.  Although some unskillful 
interpretations of the concept of acceptance are fatalistic, acceptance, the way we are describing 
it here, is not fatalistic because it takes into account the impermanent nature of all circumstances.  
There’s an old saying in many parts of the world, “If you wait ﬁ ve minutes the weather will change.”  
The fact is:  change is ever present.  It is the same with suffering.  “This too shall pass.”
The Fourth Noble Truth is the pathway out of suffering:  the Noble Eightfold Path.   
It is the integration and inter-connectedness of the components of the Noble Eightfold Path and 
the ﬁ fteen squares of the Metta Map, along with the ﬂ uidity of the Metta process itself that allows 
for the continual movement of catching and releasing, and identifying and understanding, in our 
forward movement on the path of liberation.
Intention, or “free will expressed,” is core to the entire Metta system, and permeates our 
exploration of the Noble Eightfold Path.
Mastery of each of the components of the Noble Eightfold Path will be experienced as 
an alignment in the Center Column of the Metta Map, which is our goal.  Therefore, a thorough 
cultivation of understanding, compassion, and commitment is required in order for the eight 
components of the Noble Eightfold Path to be realized and become fully integrated in our lives.  
Please observe that all of these include the critical elements of Wisdom (Panna – Right View, Right 
Intention), Virtue or Ethical Conduct ( Sila – Right Speech, Right Action, and Right Livelihood), 
and Energy Concentration (Samadhi – Right Effort, Right Mindfulness, and Right Concentration) 
as represented by the Three Levels of Intelligence: Mind, Heart, and Energetic Consciousness, and 
are grouped this way by the Buddha.
The goal of the Noble Eightfold Path is to help one arrive at the Center Column and stay 
grounded there until enlightenment.  Note that it is very easy for anyone to become dislodged from 
the Center Column, which happens when one is distracted by attachments and aversions that arise 
as a result of life’s events. 
The Center Column of the Metta Map represents the Buddha’s Middle Way.  One always 
wants to have ready access to the Center Column, as well as a ﬂ uid access to all of the other squares, 
which are resource tools for evaluating and clarifying the input of data and information that is 
continually bombarding the human condition.  This is where the Buddha’s skill of “discernment” 
enters the picture, which is the critical dynamic of the Metta system.  
Any prolonged distraction, or attachment to any of the squares causes instability in 
the individual or the situation.  One must always have ready access to the Center Column to stay on 
the Path, which is our goal as Buddhist practitioners.
Buddhist teacher and scholar, Ven. Walpola Rahula in What the Buddha Taught, said that 
the components of the Noble Eightfold Path “are to be developed more or less simultaneously, 
as far as possible, according to the capacity of each individual.  They are all linked together and 
each helps the cultivation of the others.”(2)  In appreciation for Ven. Rahula, he clari ﬁ es for us 
the inter-connectedness and the concurrent, dynamic relationship of all components of the Noble 
Eightfold Path, and why it is important to maintain the intention of being mindful of all of them at 
the same time, attending to each one as we practice the Dharma.  
261
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Perpetrators and Victims
In the moment of inﬂ icting trauma, whether by a parent, a criminal, or a soldier, the perpetrator 
has lost his sense of humanity for the victim, which will be illustrated in the following scenarios.  He 
has “thinged” or devalued the victim or victims, and has taken away their humanness.  In that same 
moment, the perpetrator has also become a non-human in the eyes of the victim.  They have both 
lost their connectivity to the universal core of humanity.  What we have found through the literature 
and throughout history is that if the tear of detachment from this core is to be reaf ﬁ xed, the same 
procedure for repair must occur for both victims and perpetrators.  The moral ﬁ ber that was torn in 
the act of violence must ﬁ rst be identi ﬁ ed, then be fully accepted as actually having occurred, be 
forgiven, and ﬁ nally be atoned for, i.e. before the victim and perpetrator can return to “at-one-ment.”  
This four step mending process is the starting point of reconciliation, and it establishes 
the framework for building a new relationship between victim and perpetrator.  This mending process 
is transformational, and when it is complete and successful, both parties recognize that they are 
no longer the same persons they were before the act of violence was committed.  In order for 
the amends to be successful for both victim and perpetrator, it must be both offered and received in 
both word and deed; a verbal apology is insuf ﬁ cient without an appropriate accompanying Right 
Action.  Both parties have been wounded – not just the victim; for it is in the aftermath of the act 
of violence that the perpetrator’s wounds begin to grow.  Hence the old Chinese proverb:  “When 
acting in rage – dig two graves.”
Scenario:  Trauma by Parent – The Act
The time is “Hell Hour.”  Mom has come home from work, the house is a mess, the kids 
aren’t doing their homework, dinner isn’t started, friends have come over even though this was not 
allowed, she’s had a horriﬁ c day at work, trafﬁ c was jammed, there’s a bicycle in the driveway, her 
morning requests have been ignored, and the house is in chaos.
Mom comes through the door, sees the chaos, and goes into a rage.  She screams at 
the children to get their friends out, and as she walks through the house her rage grows. She picks 
up a belt and starts randomly swinging it, hitting the children mercilessly as they scream and try to 
escape.
Scenario:  Trauma by Parent – The Act
Perpetrators and Victims
262
Conference
Illustration: Trauma by Parent – The Act
V = Children; P = Mom
The Metta Map shows where all parties are at this moment of violence.  The Mom is in 
Zero Tolerance for the situation.  Her heart is closed and she is Emotionally Disconnected from 
her children because the Rules have been broken.  In her rage, Time Stops.  The children are 
Defensive and Vulnerable; they realize they have broken the Rules, and also feel that Mom has 
broken the Rules and betrayed them. They stand in Time Stops with their terror, and Believe that 
they are responsible for alienating their mother’s love forever.
Commentary:  In reality, both mother and children are victims of life’s circumstances.  
Mom, in her fatigue, fears that her life is out of control, and she displaces this fear on her children.  
In this moment the children are terriﬁ ed; in their childhood narcissism they take full responsibility 
for violating the household rules, and for provoking their mother’s rage.  If this behavior continues, 
the children will come to understand and believe that upset, con ﬂ ict, and rage are an acceptable 
way of life and will perpetuate this behavior in their adult lives.  Thus the Biblical expression:  
“The sins of the fathers.”
Scenario: Trauma by Parent – The Resolution
The children are huddled in the corner, hugging each other and sobbing, saying “I’m 
sorry.  I’m sorry.”  Mom goes to the kitchen, catches her breath, and starts to weep over the grief of 
the violence she has just inﬂ icted.  Her heart begins to crack open, and all the love for her children 
as well as her remorse for the act comes spilling out.  She collects herself and sees clearly what she 
has done.  She immediately goes to the children and apologizes, embracing them, telling them that 
she loves them and how sorry she is. She promises that no matter how bad her day, no matter how 
Scenario: Trauma by Parent – The Resolution
263
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
upset she might be, there is no excuse for what she did.  This is her atonement.  The children, 
weeping, apologize as well.  They didn’t mean to make her so mad; they didn’t know.  They promise 
to be more respectful of the household rules.  
Illustration:  Trauma by Parent – The Resolution
F = Family
The Metta Map shows where all parties are at this moment of reconciliation and resolution.  
The mom and the children are both Committed to the uni ﬁ cation of the family.  They all have 
Compassion for one another, and they all Understand how dangerous and intrusive life’s events can be.  
Commentary:  In an exhausted heap they hug and rock.  They feel the energetic love they 
all have for one another.  The tears begin to subside and their hearts unite.  Together, Mom and 
the kids tidy up the house and prepare dinner.  At dinner they say “Grace” and promise to be grateful 
for what they have, reafﬁ rming that they are a family that loves each other.
Scenario:  Same Scenario without Trauma
Exhausted Mom comes home from work and sees the chaos.  She stands in the doorway 
shaking her head, laughing at the absurdity of the situation.  The children freeze and look at her, 
knowing that they really messed up; they pause, quietly waiting for a reaction.  Mom comments, 
“I think it’s time for your guests to go home.  We need to tidy up the house before dinner so that you 
guys can get to your homework.”  The children breathe a sigh of relief. The friends stay and help 
clean up the house and then quietly leave, saying “Goodbye – sorry we made a mess.”  Mom goes 
Scenario:  Same Scenario without Trauma
264
Conference
to the kitchen, and the children come in to apologize.  Mom says, “Thank you guys for cleaning up.  
It’s really hard when I come home tired, and you know it’s not safe having children in the house 
when there’s no adult.  Please don’t do that again.”  The children hug their mom and apologize; 
without being asked, they start helping to prepare dinner. Where do you want to live?
Illustration:  Same Scenario without Trauma
M = Mom; C = Children
The Metta Map shows where all parties are at this time.  Mom walks in and Understands
that the kids have broken the Rules.  Standing in Right View she has Compassion for their foolishness, 
and Thinks About how to address this violation Differently in a skillful way.  She Trusts in the strength 
of their relationship, and instructs the children to resume appropriate behavior.  She is Committed to 
the well-being and harmony of her family in all circumstances.  The children fully Understand that 
they broke the Rules and feel Vulnerable for their transgressions.  They have Compassion for their 
mom and Understand that to keep peace in the house they must stay Committed to family unity.
Commentary:  How precious the pause of reason and compassion in the midst of complicated 
and upsetting circumstances.  Each of us is gifted with this opportunity to pause and breathe, to see 
a situation as it is, and to be skillful in our responses.  No one is harmed.  This mom is a reminder 
to all of us that it is so easy to step one way or the other.

265
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Scenario:  Trauma by Criminal – The Act
A 27-year-old man was given a full-on bachelor party at a private nightclub by his friends.  
All the “trimmings” were on hand for his last garrulous night of bachelorhood.  Somehow in 
the preparation the friends overlooked providing a sober driver.  At 2:00 a.m. the groom stumbled 
into his car, drove out of the parking lot, and in his intoxicated state he entered a freeway going 
the wrong way.  He collided head-on with a family of ﬁ ve and killed them all.  The police escorted 
the groom to jail, and he went into a suicidal depression.  The victims’ extended family was simply 
shrouded in a cloud of grief, bewilderment, and rage.  
Illustration:  Trauma by Criminal – The Act
V = Family; P = Drunk Driver
The Metta Map shows where all parties are at this moment of violence.  The groom 
Understands that he has violated many Rules, and has Zero Tolerance for himself.  In his shattered 
state Time Stops, and he feels deep Compassion for the victims and their family.  The victims’ 
family is in Zero Tolerance because all Rules have been broken.  Feeling Vulnerable because 
the world now seems unsafe, they are Emotionally Disconnected from the groom/drunken driver; 
they have deep Compassion for each other as they struggle through this unbearable time of sorrow
Commentary:  This trauma is a breaking point for everyone involved.  Their minds 
and hearts have been cracked open, and they are left in agony as to how to respond and recover.  
Each of us will have that moment.  How we perceive and process traumatic events will determine 
the quality of the rest of our lives. 
Scenario:  Trauma by Criminal – The Act
266
Conference
Scenario:  Trauma by Criminal – The Transition
The young groom is transferred from jail to a psychiatric hospital because of his suicide 
attempt.  He comes to grips with the consequences of his reckless act and takes responsibility for 
it.  He realizes that an action of atonement must be taken if he is to survive his depression, though 
he can’t imagine how he can make amends.  The victims’ family feels that it is impossible to move 
forward.  In a cauldron of emotions, they are in and out of anger, confusion, and sorrow.
Illustration:  Trauma by Criminal – The Transition
V = Family; P = Drunk Driver
The Metta Map shows where the drunk driver and the victims’ family are during this 
transitional period.  The drunk driver Understands what he has done, and has great Compassion
for the victims’ family.  Even though he is Committed to atoning for his actions, he Believes that 
this is Not Possible.  The victims’ family feels that it is Not Possible to forgive the drunken driver, 
and they still feel Vulnerable and Defensive.
Commentary:  In this vulnerable state, once again there is a fork in the road.  The tenderness 
of the situation requires pausing and breathing to cultivate the beginning of Right View.  It is in 
the opening of the heart that seeds of forgiveness and atonement are planted; they must be watered 
and nurtured for them to mature.  If indignation and ego take hold, these seeds of redemption can die.
Scenario:  Trauma by Criminal – The Transition
267
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Scenario:  Trauma by Criminal – The Resolution (1)
The driver agonizes and wrestles with depression, trying to survive his guilt for the next two 
years.  He spends time in jail and receives counseling.  He eventually conjures up the courage to 
write the victims’ family a letter.  He expresses his deep sorrow, and offers a prayer that they have 
been able to recover from their losses.  He lets them know that he hasn’t yet forgiven himself for 
his deed.  During this time of re ﬂ ection and soul-searching he decides that since he had been 
a successful, high-pro ﬁ le person, when he is released from prison he would go to high schools, 
universities, and civic clubs to speak in memory of the family he killed.  For his atonement he would 
tell his story, and the burden he has had to bear, with the intention of preventing future sorrows, 
grief, and trauma for others – be they victims or perpetrators.
After two years the victim’s family receives the driver’s letter from jail.  The sincerity of 
the letter pierces their wall of rage, allowing for the realization that he is a human being who is also 
suffering.  This shift eases their sorrow for themselves, and opens their hearts to all suffering beings.
Illustration:  Trauma by Criminal – The Resolution (1)
V = Family; P = Driver
The Metta Map shows us that the driver has come to Right View and clearly Understands 
what he must do for atonement.  He has Compassion for all involved:  the victims’ family, 
his parents, his fiancée, his siblings, his friends and colleagues, the police who attended 
the accident scene, and himself.  He is fully Committed to responsible behavior, keeping an open 
heart of loving-kindness for all beings, and practicing his method of atonement whenever possible.  
The victims’ family Understands that they can never replace their lost loved ones, and that sorrow 
and suffering are inevitable occurrences in the life experience.  They have Compassion  for 
Scenario:  Trauma by Criminal – The Resolution (1)
268
Conference
themselves and the driver, they Trust in the healing process, and Believe that they can continue 
moving on.  They also feel Committed to not cause harm to others, to not be quick to judge, and to 
stay present in their affections toward one another.
Commentary:  The First Noble Truth is that there will be suffering.  The Second Noble 
Truth is that there is a cause for suffering.  The Third Noble Truth tells us that there is a remedy for 
our suffering.  The Fourth Noble Truth, the Noble Eightfold Path, gives us the tools for liberating 
us from our suffering.  It is in times of trauma that we are challenged to stay on the Path.
Scenario:  Trauma by Criminal – The Resolution (2)
 The driver’s depression deepens and permeates every aspect of his life, and drives 
him deeper and deeper into hopelessness and despair where suicidal ideation is ever-present.  
He copes with drugs and alcohol, which deepens his alienation.  He feels chronically disconnected 
from others, and is exhausted in his attempt to defend the circumstances of his life.  The victim’s 
family remains in rage and sorrow, clinging to the violation from this experience.  They make their 
martyred circumstance the family identity, and remain committed to defending their indignation 
for the rest of their lives.
Illustration:  Trauma by Criminal – The Resolution (2)
V = Family; P = Drunk Driver

269
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
The Metta Map shows us that the driver has never embraced his responsibility for his 
actions, and he thinks it’s Not Possible to ever change his state of being.  He remains Emotionally 
Disconnected from himself and everyone else, and is Vulnerable to continued despair.  He has 
Zero Tolerance for his circumstances, and is Defensive when confronted.  His lack of Commitment 
to anything makes him subject to the whims of his angst.  The victims’ family, giving vent to their 
rage and sorrow, have Zero Tolerance for the driver, and are 100% Committed to their martyred 
identity, which keeps them in chronic trauma.  Their Rules are that they must continue their crusade 
of sorrow, and it’s Not Possible to change.  Their hearts are closed.
Commentary:  Clinging, clinging, clinging – the source of all suffering.  With trauma, 
the drama is so acute that the nerve-endings of the body want to cling on so tightly for fear that if they 
ever let loose another trauma would occur.  It’s a strange way to protect oneself; totally unskillful, 
but a far too-common event.
Scenario:  Trauma by War – The Act
There are no words to adequately describe the horrors of war, and the trauma that radiates 
through generations can induce Post-Traumatic Stress Syndrome Disorder (PTSD) in individuals, 
families, towns, cities, and countries.  The consequences of war can linger for centuries.  To say that 
we can create a scenario that is a complete representation would be naïve.  We will try, however, 
to give a sample from one family that reﬂ ects three generations of suffering and the consequential 
destruction of familial ties.
My father was a pilot in World War II.  He was twenty years old, a young Christian who had 
just ﬁ nished chiropractic school.  Early on it was to his credit, and later on to his shame, that he had 
bombed most of the major cities of Europe.  During his last ﬂ ight his plane was shot down.  He was 
able to save most of his crew, but he was the last to parachute out.  His co-pilot was unconscious, so 
he took him with him out of the plane.  Due to the weight, the landing shattered both of my father’s 
legs, and the co-pilot was dead.
War is a double-edged sword in which each individual member of the combat forces on 
both sides of the conﬂ ict experiences being both victim, and if not immediately then subsequently, 
and also a perpetrator.  This Scenario will utilize the Metta Map to chart the trauma from its origin, 
through its transition period, and ﬁ nally to its resolution of atonement – for one individual, my father.  
Scenario:  Trauma by War – The Act
270
Conference
Illustration:  Trauma by War – The Act
V/P = Dr. R. Shepard
Using the Metta Map, my father Understood that he was in an aerial combat zone.  Being 
shot down from his plane, however, instantly obliterated the Rules of immortal youth, and shattered 
his belief that he would go home in one piece.  He was Vulnerable to the enemy, Emotionally and 
physically Disconnected from any support system, and in Zero Tolerance for the fact that he was 
rendered helpless and could not defend himself.  He Believed that death was a possibility; and if 
death didn’t come, he Believed it would Not be Possible to escape.  His Commitment to America 
was still at 100%.  
Commentary:  Armies are populated by the young and the idealistic, and by the hungry and 
the poor.  Their training inﬂ ates their idealism and their sense of power and immortality.  These are 
rapidly shattered by trauma in the combat zone, and the veil of denial is pierced.
Scenario:  Trauma by War – The Transition 
My father was captured and taken to hospital.  His right leg was amputated, and he spent 
the next eight months as a POW.  For the family, he was listed as MIA and presumed dead.  
My mother was eighteen with an infant child.  Working two shifts she was now a widow.
While in hospital my father was blessed with kind nurses and doctors – despite the fact that 
they were war enemies.  This blessing of kindness caused confusion, and initiated the questioning 
of the rightness of killing anyone.
Scenario:  Trauma by War – The Transition 
271
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Fast-forward many years.  My father escaped from prison and returned to the United States.  
He resumed his chiropractic practice with my mother as his assistant.  Unable to face his new identity 
as an amputee, he felt that he was less than a full man.  He took to carousing and womanizing to 
prove himself in his altered state.  He was full of nightmare and anger, unable to express or talk 
about what had happened in the war.  A divorce followed, and estrangement, multiple marriages.  
Illustration:  Trauma by War – The Transition
V/P = Dr. R. Shepard
Using the Metta Map, my father traversed to an intermediate stage in his progressive journey 
toward resolution and atonement.  This is just a snapshot of where my father was at one point in 
time.  He Understood that he was more complex than he ever imagined in his youth, and that he had 
broken Rules with reckless abandon.  He started Thinking about life Differently, always feeling 
somewhat guarded and Emotionally Disconnected.  He cultivated great Compassion for others, 
albeit at arms-length due to his Vulnerability.  He Defended his history with an encasement of 
non-disclosure, Trusted in his abilities, and remained Committed to economic and social success, 
which was based on his perceived duty to do the right thing.      
Commentary:  Transitions are not simple or instantaneous, but complex, entangled, full 
of joy and sorrow, disappointment and success.  Much like adolescence, it is unpredictable and 
uncertain as to outcome, often impulsive and full of woe.  Transitions are full of turning points, full 
of times for pausing and re ﬂ ecting to consider the consequences of one’s decisions.  It is critical 
to keep track of intention to avoid being diverted by delusions and fabrications, and seduced into 
clinging to what appears to be the easy way.

272
Conference
Scenario:  Trauma by War – The Resolution  
During his third marriage he spent 25 years going back to Europe every year to see 
the reconstruction of the cities he had bombed.  He belonged to service organizations that supported 
students and communities in Europe.  That said, it wasn’t until much later that we were able to be 
close as a father and daughter, and it wasn’t until my son was in his twenties that my father could 
have a family relationship with his grandson.  He was eighty before he could tell his war stories, 
which enabled him to feel a sense of atonement.  This was perhaps the last purging of the PTSD 
that he had endured for over sixty years.
Illustration:  Trauma by War – The Resolution
V/P = Dr. R. Shepard
Using the Metta Map, we see that my father Understood that he was a part of a complex 
time in history.  He had Compassion for himself as well as for all of the comrades in service on both 
sides of the conﬂ ict.  He also came to have Compassion for the families on both sides that suffered 
the collateral damage, the insidious isolation that was imposed and endured as the result of dividing 
up Europe and destroying the fundamental fabric of the American family.  He learned to Trust in 
Friendship, see things Differently, and Believe that there was goodness in humanity as well as evil.  
He no longer needed to defend his past, and he remained Committed to duty, to country, and to his 
family until his death.
Commentary:  Resolution, reconciliation, and grace come at their own paces.  The elements 
necessary for the trauma victim to repair are: to see clearly what occurred; to understand how it 
happened; and to learn how to survive this knowledge through relating their story to another so it 
is no longer buried in the heart.  It is necessary to ﬁ nd an expression of restitution and amends with 
Scenario:  Trauma by War – The Resolution  
273
Buddhist 
Psychotherapy
Right Action.  It is also necessary to execute and perform this action to give it meaning, so it can 
replace symbolically, if not actually, the damage that was done in the past.  For my father, it took 
over forty-ﬁ ve years of effort for him to begin to feel that he could hope for atonement.
The scenarios above illustrate the four-step mending process, which can lead to reconciliation.  
Anywhere along the way there is the opportunity to clarify and move towards repair or redemption.  
There is even more opportunity for the hurt and anger to derail into unhappiness and lead back to 
the trauma.  To be successful, this process needs to be cultivated with great skill. 
Summary
In conclusion, I hope it is now clear that for any trauma to be resolved – be it minor, 
medium, or huge – it is best served by acknowledging the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold 
Path; by not getting lost and believing that suffering is unique, that it does not have a source, and 
that it does not have a remedy.  When trauma is not resolved, the individual, family, community, 
etc. can get tossed into the pit of despair.  The illustrations given above are limited, and yet I hope 
communicate the extremes of the continuum of trauma. The speci ﬁ c techniques for personal and 
clinical application of the Metta Process have not been discussed in this paper.  For those who are 
interested, please contact the author. 
In our ﬁ rst example, we see that in our daily lives we have opportunities to pause and correct 
our path.  When using the Metta Map as a guidepost you can quickly see if you have slipped into 
fear and anger on the right side of the Map, and have temporarily lost contact with the Middle Way.  
In our second illustration we demonstrated how trauma can begin to radiate beyond two 
parties, and that no matter how skillful one may be, the healing process requires time and diligence.  
It also requires cooperation from a closed heart to embrace what seems unbearable, which is for 
the victim to forgive the perpetrator.  Atonement and amends must be a conscious Right Action.  
In our third illustration we see how processing through trauma evolved over a 60-year period.  
In the absence of having a tool such as the Metta Map, we saw how the process of healing from 
the horrors of war was prolonged.  It is my desire that all of us who live with and/or treat all forms 
of suffering, from the minor to the major, have the beneﬁ t of using this Map as a guidepost and aid; 
that it serve as a companion reminder to those precious wounded that there is a visual queuing way 
they can use to re-direct themselves and get clarity on this healing path; that it help both victims 
and perpetrators have success by approximation; and that it keeps them from falling into oblivion 
in a trauma bond that will not release them to intimacy, love, and hope for the balance of their lives.
The last intention of this paper is to invite you, as Buddhist practitioners and educators, 
to take this tool, this Metta Map, and explore it for your own application in both intra and 
interpersonal conﬂ ict resolution.  I know that you will bring an additional richness to the Metta 
System as it continues its process of evolution.  If the reader is frustrated by any unanswered 
questions or limitations in this paper, it is solely the author’s responsibility.
I am grateful to the clients and life teachers who have endured and generously shared their 
suffering and experiences of trauma with me.  May their examples of healing radiate throughout 
the world.
Summary
274
Conference
References:
A Buddhist Catechism: According to the Canon of the Southern Church, Col. H. S. Olcott; ﬁ rst 
published by the Theosophical Society, 1881.  
Azim’s Bardo:  A Father’s Journey from Murder to Forgiveness, Azim Noordin Khamisa; Tariq 
Khamisa Foundation 1998
Beyond Forgiveness: Reﬂ ections on Atonement, Phil Coisineau; Josey-Bass, A Wiley Imprint, 2011
Dharma & The Metta Map, Dr. Barbara Wright with Dr. Stephen Long; not yet completed.
Iroquois on Fire:  A V oice from the Mohawk Nation, Douglas M. George-Kanentiio; University of 
Nebraska Press, 2008
The Triangulation of Vectors Where “Time Stops”:  The Source of All Suffering, Dr. Barbara 
Wright; paper presented at Sakyadhita International Buddhist Women’s Conference, 
Bangkok, Thailand; 2011
War and the Soul: Healing Our Nation’s Veterans from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Edward 
Tick; Quest Books, 2005
What the Buddha Taught, Ven. Walpola Rahula; Grove Press, Revised Edition 1974
References: