# buddha-radical-shrink
# source PDF: raw/buddha-radical-shrink.pdf | pages: 120 | ~26670 words

by Ven. Dr. Madawela Punnaji Maha Theraby Ven. Dr. Madawela Punnaji Maha Thera
BUDDHIST MAHA VIHARA
Continuing the spread of Buddhism in Malaysia
for over 124 years ……….
Millions have benefitted from the selfless dedication 
of our Sangha, volunteer teachers & friends of 
the Vihara obtaining Buddhist education, 
free publications, counselling, blessings, 
welfare assistance, etc.
1
Publication of the
Sasana Abhiwurdhi Wardhana Society
佛陀教义弘扬协会
Buddhist Maha Vihara,
123, Jalan Berhala, Brickfields,
50470 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Tel: 603-2274 1141 Fax: 603-2273 2570
E-Mail: info@buddhistmahavihara.org
Website: www.buddhistmahavihara.org
 www.ksridhammananda.org
 www.cabe.org.my
 www.bisds.org
Published for Free Distribution 
Permission to reprint for free distribution can be
obtained upon request.
October 2018 – 2,000 copies
Printed by 
Ideal Print House (002336965-V)
(A member of Uniprints Marketing Sdn Bhd)
ISBN: 978-967-2253-02-0

2
3
Buddha The Radical Shrink
Buddhist Psychotherapy
by
Ven. Dr. Madawela Punnaji Maha Thera 
PROLOGUE
Western interest in Buddhism has a history of a little 
more than three centuries. It is only quite recently, however, 
that the Western intellect has begun to dig deeper into the 
profound teachings of the Buddha. Modern psychologists 
who have experimented with Buddhist meditation have 
begun to notice a close parallelism as well as a few differences 
between modern psychological thinking and the teachings of 
the Buddha. This paper is the result of a long research to 
discover the relation between early Buddhism and modern 
psychotherapeutic theory and practice, with the hope that it 
might open vistas of knowledge that lay hidden under the 
ashes of bygone centuries. This study has also thrown some 
valuable insights into the mysteries of the human mind that 
has puzzled many a great scientist of the modern age. An 
important consequence of this research was the discovery  
of the intrinsic psychotherapeutic value of early Buddhism, 
as distinct from the many varieties of Buddhism available  
in the spiritual supermarket today. 
4
Buddhism Then And Now
It is often thought today that Buddhism is a religion 
containing numerous myths, traditions and mystical 
practices. On close examination of the original teachings 
of the Buddha, however, we begin to recognize the error in 
this prevalent view. Therefore, it is vitally important to avoid 
confusing modern Buddhism, as it is practiced in different 
cultures today, with what was taught and practiced by Gotama 
the Buddha and his disciples more than twenty-five centuries 
ago. What is practiced today in the three main cultural forms 
of Buddhism, whether Theravada, Mahayana, or Vajrayana, 
are mainly rituals and ceremonies with symbols of worship, 
accompanied by emotionally held traditional dogmas. This 
type of Buddhism is not different from any other religion 
with different dogmas, rituals and symbols of worship, which 
serve mankind only as a placebo, in temporarily reducing the 
anxieties and worries of life, regarding the here and hereafter. 
A marked distinction succinctly presented would be that the 
early Buddhists sought refuge in the wisdom of the Buddha, 
while modern Buddhists seem to seek refuge in his supposed 
supernatural powers, just as theistic religions have always 
done.
The original teaching of the Buddha was a psychological 
solution to the troubles and tribulations of life. It is only 
through a thorough examination of the early teachings of 
the Buddha in comparison with the beliefs and practices of 
modern day Buddhists, that one may recognize the distinction 
between original Buddhism and the modern Buddhist 
traditions and practices. Without adequately understanding 
this important distinction between early Buddhism, and 
5
the culturally oriented modern Buddhism, it would not be 
possible to comprehend the important psychotherapeutic 
basis of the teachings of the Buddha. 
Therefore, it is necessary to emphasize at this point that 
whenever the term “Buddhism” is used henceforth in this 
book, it is the original teachings of the Buddha that is referred 
to, and not to any form of modern Buddhism that is prevalent 
among people of any Buddhist culture today. The original 
teachings we refer to are the Sutta Pitaka and the Vinaya 
Pitaka that have been preserved by the Theravada Buddhists, 
but the comprehension of which is inadequately maintained. 
All modern scholars are agreed that Sutta and Vinaya Pitaka 
represent the original teachings, and the Abhidhamma Pitaka 
is only a later incorporation of the dogmas of a particular 
school of cultural Buddhism. 
How This Paper Is Written
The research findings presented in this paper are in 
response to the urgent need to come up with a successful 
psychotherapy, based on the original teachings of the 
Buddha. It is important to know that the original teachings of 
the Buddha have been carried by rote and written down later 
in the form of the Pali Tipitaka. Fortunately, the Theravada1 
school of Buddhism seems to have preserved, at least to some 
extent, the original teachings even though this school may not 
have made adequate efforts to comprehend them. This school 
laid more emphasis on the texts called the Abhidhamma, 
1 Theravada is the earliest school of Buddhism known to modern historians. It 
is the form of Buddhism found today in Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, and Cambodia. 
6
which was only an interpretation of the teachings according 
to a particular school, rather than the ideas expressed by the 
Buddha in his original teachings.
Comparative Study (Paper 2)
In this paper, 2 we shall discuss at first the basic 
psychological problem experienced by all human beings, as 
seen by Sigmund Freud, the father of modern psychotherapy. 
We shall then compare this with the description of the 
fundamental problem of human existence  pointed out by 
the Buddha. We shall also discuss the problem of existence 
as seen by Charles Darwin, when he formulated the theory 
of evolution. We shall see how these three descriptions 
wonderfully complement one another. Then we shall 
examine how Freud attempted to solve this problem, and 
how he lamented about the imperfections of his method. 
This will be followed by a description of the method used 
by the Buddha to solve the same problem, and the reason 
for its success in solving the problem by transforming the 
human personality. We shall also dwell in detail on the 
method adapted by the Buddha,  which went beyond the 
goal of Sigmund Freud. 
Sigmund Freud’s main concern was to help his  
patients, who suffered from an abnormal level of mental 
2 This research paper was developed during a period of residency, from December 
2000 to August 2001, at the Hsi Lai University in Los Angeles. The author was provided 
a secluded environment in which to organize and present the findings of his research 
that had lasted more than fifty years. The author had prepared for this task by studying 
modern science, Eastern and Western philosophy and psychology, and even made a 
thorough theoretical and a practical study of the original teachings of the Buddha.
7
health, to reach a normal level  of mental health. The 
Buddha, on the other hand, was interested in helping 
normal people to overcome their normal worries and 
anxieties, including the normal fear of death. In doing so, he 
discovered a supernormal level of perfect mental health 
and happiness, through a process of evolution of the human 
consciousness. While discussing this, we shall also discuss 
Charles Darwin’s theory of biological evolution, and also 
refer to the culmination of this biological evolutionary 
process by entering a psychological  process of evolution, 
where the human consciousness transcends the normal  
level and reaches the ultimate evolutionary level by 
Awakening from “the Dream of Existence.” This is the 
Buddhist “Supernormal Enlightenment,” which may 
be judged from modern standards as too farfetched. Yet 
an impartial thorough examination of the Buddha’s 
discoveries may result in a wonderful eye opening to those 
who are puzzled by the psychotherapeutic problems of  
the modern day. 
The Purpose Of This Paper
Research and information presented in this study 
is an effort to meet the urgent need for an effective 
psychotherapy. Here we review several historical and 
contemporary psychotherapeutic theories, and also go 
through a thorough examination of the modern findings 
in neuroscience and methods of psychotherapy, as well 
as an adequate examination of Buddhist psychology and 
philosophy. 
8
Buddhist principles relevant to psychotherapy can 
be considered mainly under what is today translated as the 
Four Noble Truths, and specifically the Noble Eightfold 
Path, on which all Buddhist psychotherapeutic techniques 
have to be based. The Noble Eightfold Path deals with the 
cognitive, affective and the motor phases of the reaction of 
an organism to sensory stimulation, and is therefore a broad-
based approach to psychotherapy. A unique contribution of 
the present research is the proposal that when the first step 
in The Noble Eightfold Path, which is the Harmonious 
Perspective,3 is well established in a client, then the other 
seven steps: Harmonious-orientation, Harmonious speech, 
Harmonious action, Harmonious life-style, Harmonious 
exercise, Harmonious attention, and Harmonious equilibrium 
will automatically follow. This will be accompanied by 
a complete personal transformation of an unhealthy 
personality to a healthy, mature, and happy personality. 
According to the Buddha, all psychological disorders 
stem from the Disharmonious perspective, which is the 
unhealthy way one perceives one’s experience, as a “self” in 
relationship with others and circumstances, in a world that 
exists. The Harmonious Perspective is discussed in detail to 
provide potential therapists with the necessary knowledge to 
deal with the variety of psychological disorders that they will 
encounter in practice. The relationships between Freudian 
and other psychological concepts are also examined to show 
both similarities as well as differences.
3 This uncommon translation of the eight steps in the eightfold way is an effort to 
facilitate comprehension.
9
Application of a proper knowledge base with a 
view to transform the personality is the primary goal of 
Buddhist psychotherapy. This holistic approach contrasts 
with the common symptomatic treatment in conventional 
practice. However, Buddhist psychotherapy is similar to 
conventional psychotherapies in that the client is assigned 
the major role in the healing process, while the therapist 
plays a facilitative role. The methods proposed do not, 
however, involve converting clients to Buddhism. Our 
sincere aim is only to help clients, who probably are mainly 
Buddhists or free thinkers, to view their problem from a 
healthy perspective. Specific case studies provide examples 
for practitioners who may wish to apply the knowledge base 
presented. 
Before one can arrive at an appropriate psycho-
therapeutic technique founded on the teachings of the 
Buddha, it is also essential, for psychotherapists who 
contemplate using Buddhist psychotherapy on their clients, 
to find out how this knowledge can be successfully utilized 
on themselves and in every day psychotherapeutic practice. 
There appears to be a lack of such systematic Buddhist 
psychotherapy at the present time. The first section of 
this book presents detailed information on the theoretical 
background that would be useful to psychotherapists. The 
second section presents application of this knowledge base 
in dealing with actual clients and on themselves. (experience 
of author).
10
Historical Survey
Psychotherapy, as it is practiced in the modern world, 
began with Sigmund Freud, the Viennese neurologist 
who turned introspective psychologist and psychoanalyst, 
at the beginning of the twentieth century. Later followers 
as well as dissenters began to modify or reformulate his 
theories. Today, there is only a jumble of theories, each in 
disagreement with the others. Students are confused and 
practitioners generally take an eclectic position because 
they are undecided as to which approach to take. There are 
a few practitioners, however, who choose just one position 
and adhere to it. Of late, many books have mushroomed, 
condemning psychotherapy. These writers argue that modern 
psychotherapy as well as psychoanalysis is a failure.
Although psychotherapy has gone into disrepute today 
among several thinkers, people in Europe and even in North 
America often go to the psychotherapist, hoping to find a 
solution to their diverse emotional problems. Going to the 
psychotherapist today is like going to the family doctor. It is 
not only abnormal people who visit the therapist today; even 
normal people visit the therapist for counsel when overcome 
by worries and anxieties. Even the law courts have started 
consulting therapists to decide upon the sanity of criminals. 
The therapists have a great influence on the thinking of 
people. 
Even politicians are concerned about this new trend. 
People, who formerly visited the priest or minister for 
advice, when they were in trouble, today visit the therapist 
instead. Probably due to this fact, Christian ministers and 
11
Catholic priests have started studying modern psychology, 
and they practice psychological counselling as a part of their 
ministerial work. Buddhist monks and teachers, living in the 
West, are also called upon to help people with their emotional 
problems. They have therefore recognized the need for a 
form of Buddhist psychotherapy. 
Some modern psychologists who have studied 
and practiced Buddhist meditation find that some of the 
Buddhist concepts appear to come in conflict with modern 
psychological theory and practice. Therefore, the Buddhists 
who are interested in helping are faced with the task of 
coming up with a Buddhist theory that explains these 
apparent contradictions and bring forward a persuasive 
theory of psychotherapy. 
No researcher seems to have realized that Buddhism, in 
its original form, was already a form of psychotherapy, though 
not for abnormal people to become normal, but for normal 
people to become supernormal. The basis of this approach is 
the belief that all normal people are insane (sabbē putujjanā 
ummattakā). Unfortunately today, the Buddhist practice 
has descended to the level of a religion of faith, worship, 
and prayer. It has lost its psychotherapeutic significance. 
Therefore the task of the modern Buddhist is not so much to 
create a new form of therapy that is acceptable to a particular 
school of Buddhist or Western thinking, but to rediscover the 
original psychotherapy that is already in existence, though 
hidden, in the original teachings of the Buddha.
12
Buddhism As Psychotherapy
In speaking of the psychotherapeutic aspect of 
Buddhism, it must be said that psychotherapy is not merely 
one aspect of the original Buddhism. It would be more 
accurate to say that it was entirely a form of psychotherapy. 
The Buddha emphatically states in the Buddhist scripture, 
Anguttara Nikaya,  that it may be possible for a person to 
claim to have been free from physical disease even for a 
hundred years, but it is not possible for a person to claim to 
have been free from mental disease even for one day, other 
than a perfected disciple (Arahat), or the Buddha himself. 
A critic may have doubts about this apparently ostentatious 
claim. Yet it is recognized by all Buddhist scholars that the 
ultimate aim of the Buddha, according to the early Buddhist 
scriptures, was to produce Arahats who were perfect in 
mental health. 
Arahatship was the culmination of the original Buddhist 
practice. If the Arahat is the only person with perfect mental 
health, the Buddha’s ultimate aim or target was nothing below 
“perfect mental health” for all human beings who are ready 
for it. This means that Buddhism is not merely another form 
of psychotherapy, but rather the “ultimate psychotherapy,” 
that brings about perfection in mental health. In fact, it has 
been said that while modern psychotherapy attempts to turn 
abnormal “suffering” to normal “unhappiness,” the Buddha 
has been turning normal “unhappiness” into supernormal 
“happiness,” by bringing people to “perfection in mental 
health,” where even temporary mental disturbances, like 
common worries and anxieties, are brought to an end. 
13
According to the Pali Nikaya teachings, which are 
considered to be the earliest sources of the teachings 
of the Buddha, the Buddha has been described as the 
“Unsurpassable-physician-and-surgeon” (anuttarō bhisakkō 
sallakattō), and even as the “Unsurpassable-trainer-of-
personality” (anuttarō purisa damma sāratī). Expressed in 
modern terminology, these terms may be rendered as “the 
super psychiatrist,” or “the super personality trainer, or even 
as “the radical shrink.”
 
The Human Predicament
Having presented the above assertions, with humble 
apologies, let us now enter into a more thorough and 
systematic examination of Buddhist concepts in relation to 
modern psychotherapeutic theory and practice, which would 
indeed help us verify the validity of these claims. Before 
we come to a systematic examination of Buddhist concepts, 
however, it is necessary to explain the human predicament 
from a modern perspective. 
Modern biology tells us that we are but organisms 
in an environment. An organism is a machine similar to 
a manmade machine that works under the common laws 
of nature. Yet the organism is naturally produced, while 
the manmade machine is man-made. We know that we are 
born with a body with five sense organs: the eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue, and the body. Disturbances in the environment 
constantly stimulate our senses. There are several varieties 
of disturbances in the environment that stimulate the senses. 
Each sense organ is sensitive only to one kind of stimulus, 
14
and each sense organ reacts to stimulation only in one specific 
way. For example, light affects only the eye, not the ear or 
the nose. Sound affects only the ear. Similarly, each sense 
organ is especially receptive only to one kind of stimulus. 
Light stimulating the eye results in seeing, and in the same 
manner, sounds stimulating the ear results in hearing; so the 
nose smells, the tongue tastes, and the body feels touch.
All the different sensory data received through the 
different senses, such as, light, sound, smells, tastes, and 
touch, are carried through nerves to the brain, like telephone 
wires that carry messages. When the sensory data received 
in the brain combine with already existing memories and 
are synthesized, to construct mental images of objects with 
meanings, the world that we are aware of becomes a product 
of the reaction of the senses to stimulation, accompanied 
by the activity of the brain, which creates a mental image 
and gives meaning to it. The world that we are aware of is 
a creation of the process of sensory perception and mental 
conception, which is going on unconsciously all the time. 
This means the world that we see, hear, smell, taste, and 
touch is only a conglomeration of cinematographic moving 
pictures and feelings. 
Our comprehension of the world is limited by our senses 
and our brain’s ability to provide a meaning. The world that 
appears to be out there is not really something existing out 
there. The idea of “existence” and even “time” and “space” 
are creations of the processes of perception and conception. 
They are really pictures produced inside the brain, just as 
a camera does inside the camera. However, it is the brain 
that gives meaning to them. All this happens without our 
15
knowledge. We are not doing it consciously. This is why 
there is no “ego” or “self” or “soul” controlling the mind or 
body. Modern psychologists, scientists, as well as modern 
philosophers are aware of this fact. This means, the creator 
of the world is our own mind, and each individual is living 
in a “self-created” autonomous world. Although we live 
in a world of our own making, we communicate with one 
another through the medium of language, and thereby we 
build up the idea of a really existing world outside. Through 
exchange of ideas within a culture, we build up a cultural or 
religious view of the world, which is common only within 
the culture. This is why each culture has a different view of 
life, a different religion, and a different way of doing things. 
When we meet a person from another culture we begin to see 
that person as somewhat strange, weird, or offbeat not only 
in appearance but also in thought, feelings, and behaviour.
It is very important to recognize this fact in the modern 
world, where there is so much international and intercultural 
communication. This is not merely a Buddhist dogma, 
but a fact recognized in modern biology, psychology, and 
philosophy. It is an observable fact, which was also recognized 
by the Buddha. Buddhism is not based on dogmas or beliefs 
but on the observation of experience (ehipassiko). Modern 
scientists and psychologists seem to be only rediscovering 
what the Buddha discovered centuries ago (paccattaŋ 
veditabbo viññuhi).  This is why Buddhism has been a 
science rather than a religion from its inception. It was not a 
physical science like the modern physical sciences that focus 
attention only on the external world that is considered to be 
16
really existing in the form of visible and tangible objective 
matter and energy. 
Buddhism, on the other hand, is a mental introspective 
(opanayiko) science, or psychology. This is why Buddhism 
shares similarities with Freudian introspective psychology. 
Modern quantum physics is only beginning to recognize the 
fact that objective matter and energy are really subjective 
concepts. 
It is interesting to note at this point that the modern 
school of psychology known as Behaviourism holds that, 
to be scientific, one has to imitate the physical sciences. 
Behavioural psychologists have focused only on the 
external objective experience, and rejected introspection as 
unscientific. They define psychology as “the study of human 
behaviour,” and avoid the study of mental processes, which 
are subjective and therefore supposed to be unverifiable. 
The problem met by behaviourists is that the subjective 
mental processes could not be observed objectively, and are 
therefore considered to be unverifiable. They therefore study 
only other people’s minds, by observing their behaviour, 
but they do not study their own minds, because it has to 
be done through introspection. It is true that one cannot 
observe another person’s inner experience, but one can 
observe another person’s change of behaviour and make 
an inference by comparison with one’s own. Behaviourists 
study only human behaviour. They do not realize that the 
mind is a subjective experience and the body is an objective 
experience. Therefore, although the body can be studied only 
objectively, the mind cannot be studied objectively. Cognitive 
psychologists recognized this fact and broke up with the 
17
behaviourists, and they began to study the mind subjectively, 
through introspection. They recognized the transformation 
of behaviour that results when the thoughts are changed. 
The Buddhists on the other hand are not concerned 
about studying other people’s minds but on understanding 
their own. Buddhism is not a search for knowledge for the 
sake of knowledge. It is an effort to solve a problem in one’s 
own mind. As the structure and function of the body is the 
same in every human being, the structure and function of 
the mind is similar. If one understands one’s own mind, 
one understands minds of others as well. This fact makes it 
possible for a doctor, who has studied their own mind and 
body, and understands how they work, to help a patient, 
whether the ailment is physical or mental.
It is possible to verify another’s objective experience by 
testing it in the crucible of one’s own experience. If you tell 
me that a fruit tastes good, I can verify it only by tasting the 
fruit myself. The fruit may be an objective experience but the 
taste is a subjective experience. I cannot observe another’s 
sight, sound, smell, taste, feeling of touch, or thought, but I 
can observe mine. This is how a scientist verifies another’s 
experience. If I see bacteria under the microscope, you can 
verify it by looking at it yourself. If I hear the tune of a 
song, you can verify it by listening to it yourself. If I smell 
a perfume, you can verify it by smelling it yourself. If I feel 
the warmth of a cup of tea, you can verify it by feeling it 
yourself. This is how the scientists perform experiments. If 
we cannot trust our subjective experience, we will not be 
able to perform any scientific experiment. 
18
Cognitive psychologists realized that psychology has 
to be the study of the mind or mental processes, and that we 
cannot know about the mind by looking only at the body and 
its behaviour. Thus did the school of Cognitive Psychology 
come into being. Modern scientists dealing with quantum 
physics have begun to realize that the physical world that 
they attempt to discover is actually a mental construct. There 
are many books written on this subject by scientists as well 
as philosophers. Since modern physicists began to realize 
that the external world is only a product of perception and 
conception, objectivity has become a misnomer and a myth. 
In fact, there is no “object out there” to look at, other than 
what “seems to be out there.” 
This is why the Buddha called the object experienced, 
nāma-rūpa, which means, mental image (rūpa) and its 
identity (nāma), and the subjective experience was 
called, viññāna, which means, the process of perception. 
The Buddha also saw that there is neither a “person” that 
perceives, nor “an entity” that is being perceived. There 
is only the “process of perception.” This means, the “see-
er,” which is the subjective experience, and the object 
“seen,” which is the objective experience, are both mental 
constructs and not real entities that really “exist” in real 
time and real space. 
Even space and time are mental constructs. This is 
the meaning of “emptiness” (suññatā) of experience, which 
Mahayana Buddhists lay stress on. Without understanding 
this basic premise on which the teaching of the Buddha 
stands, we cannot understand the problem we are about to 
discuss. It is interesting to know that the Buddha is called 
19
Tathagata (tath = that; agatha = arrived at), which means 
the one who comprehended the objective “world” (that) 
to be a subjective experience,  and the subjective “self” to 
be a delusion. This is also expressed in Sanskrit as tat tvam 
asi (you are that). This means “existence,” both subjective 
and objective, are delusions or creations of the subjective 
mental process of perception and conception. They are not 
real entities but appearances.
The aim of the Buddha  was to solve the problem of 
human existence called suffering, which has to be achieved 
by each individual, examining one’s own experience, and 
not by examining other’s experience. The result is the 
disappearance of unhappiness, which is observable by 
one-self as well as by others. The systematic technique of 
the Buddha for the observation of one’s own experience was 
called systematic introspection (satipatthāna). Sigmund 
Freud’s method of psychoanalysis through free association 
is also a method of introspection, where the patient is 
helped by the analyst to observe the patient’s own mind. This 
explains why some of the findings of Freud are almost what 
the Buddha had pointed to many centuries earlier. 
Modern Psychotherapy
On an examination of the history of the evolution 
of modern psychotherapy, it can be seen that all modern 
psychological theories and practices are centred on one 
fundamental problem, which is understandable in terms of 
the “structural hypothesis,” presented by Sigmund Freud 
(in 1923). 
20
The structural hypothesis is a provisional theory of 
Freud, which divides the personality into three parts, which 
are oriented towards three goals. The three parts are: 
(1) The id that seeks pleasure
(2) The ego that seeks to be in tune with reality 
(3) The superego, which seeks to be moral 
These three parts of the personality, being differently 
oriented, must necessarily come into conflict. Freud saw that 
it is the job of the ego to put this conflict-ridden personality 
in order. Failure of the ego to do so would result in neurosis. 
Mental health is the successful performance of the “ego 
duty.”
1. id – dominated by the pleasure principle
2. ego – dominated by the reality principle 
3. superego – dominated by the morality principle
Almost all modern psychotherapeutic systems could 
be described in terms of this structural hypothesis. All the 
different psychotherapeutic systems of today could be 
broadly classified into two groups, based on this structural 
hypothesis. They are: 
(a)  The id psychologies or affective therapies that are 
mainly concerned with the id and its expressions
(b)  The ego psychologies or cognitive therapies 
that are mainly concerned with the ego and its 
functions.
It would not be necessary to discuss, at this point, the 
details of these different therapies, but it would be extremely 
21
important to go into a discussion of the fundamental 
psychological problem revealed through the structural 
hypothesis of Sigmund Freud, and also by the profound 
teachings of the Buddha. I see no better way to introduce this 
fundamental problem of human existence than to discuss 
the contents of the introductory sermon of the Buddha 
called the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutra, appearing in the 
Samyutta Nikaya, and translated by me as “The Revolution 
of the Wheel of Experience.” 
Sermon Of The Buddha
“There are two extremes, Oh Mendicants, to be avoided 
by those who progress beyond the secular life. They are:
(1)  devotion to sensual pleasure, which is inferior, 
secular, common, immature, and futile
(2)  devotion to self-mortification, which is painful, 
immature, and futile.
(3)  Avoiding these two extremes, Oh Mendicants, 
a medial way is seen by the One-Awakened-
to-Reality (Buddha),  which opens the eyes, 
brings knowledge, inner peace, super knowledge, 
awakening, and the imperturbable serenity, 
Nirvana. 
And what is that medial way? It is the Supernormal 
Eightfold Way that consists of:
22
(1) Harmonious Perspective, 
(2) Harmonious Orientation, 
(3) Harmonious Speech, 
(4) Harmonious Action, 
(5) Harmonious Lifestyle, 
(6) Harmonious Exercise, 
(7) Harmonious Attention, 
(8) Harmonious Equilibrium. 
 This is the medial way seen by the One-Awakened-
to-Reality, which opens the eyes, brings knowledge, inner 
peace, super knowledge, awakening, and the imperturbable 
serenity, Nirvana.
 “This, Oh Mendicants, is the Supernormal Truth of 
Anguish: birth is painful, aging is painful, sickness is painful, 
death is painful, meeting what is unpleasant is painful, parting 
from what is pleasant is painful, and the inability to obtain 
what one wants is painful. In short, the five personalized 
constituents of personality are painful. 
“This, Oh Mendicants, is the Supernormal Truth of 
the Origin of Anguish:  It is that emotional urge, which 
arises again and again, accompanied by delight and passion, 
and which takes delight now here, now there. It is the urge 
for sensual pleasures, the urge for existence, and the urge for 
non-existence. 
 “This, Oh Mendicants, is the Supernormal Truth of 
the Cessation of Anguish:  It is the dispassionate cessation 
of the emotional urge without remainder, free from slavery to 
it, never turning back to it. 
23
“This, Oh Mendicants, is the Supernormal Truth of 
the Way to the Cessation of Anguish: It is this Extraordinary 
Eightfold Way consisting of: Harmonious Perspective, 
Harmonious Orientation, Harmonious Speech, Harmonious 
Action, Harmonious Lifestyle, Harmonious Exercise, 
Harmonious Attention, and Harmonious Equilibrium.” 
This Sutra begins with the assertion that there are two 
extreme modes of living to be avoided. 
(1)  One is the pursuit of sensual pleasure, 
(Kamasukhallikanuyoga) – (the pleasure 
principle) -- (id) 
(2)  The other extreme is self-denial or asceticism 
(Attakilamatanuyoga) – (morality principle) -- 
(super ego) 
(3)  Avoiding these two extremes, the Buddha teaches 
a medial mode of living (Majjima Patipada) 
called the Supernormal Eight-fold Way (Ariya 
Atthangika Magga). This medial way begins with: 
A Harmonious perspective (reality principle) – 
(ego)
The structural hypothesis of Sigmund Freud tallies with 
this teaching of the Buddha and therefore could easily be 
examined in relation to it. Freud pointed to a fundamental 
problem of human existence, which the Buddha had drawn 
attention to more than twenty-five centuries earlier. 
24
Devotion to sensual pleasure (id)
       
Supernormal Eightfold Way (ego)
Devotion to self-mortification (superego)
The two extremes pointed out by the Buddha, when 
seen from a Freudian standpoint, would clearly be the work 
of the id and the superego; devotion to sensual pleasure 
is the work of the id, and self-mortification is the work 
of the superego. The medial way, which begins with the 
Harmonious Perspective, is clearly the work of the ego. 
One small difference, which will be discussed in detail later
(1)  The medial path of Freud was the sublimation of 
energy 
(2)  The medial path of the Buddha was the pursuit of 
tranquillity. 
The Buddha explains this further, in the sutra, in 
speaking of the Fourfold Supernormal Reality. According to 
Freud, the sublimation of energy has left civilized man with 
discontent, unfortunately. (Civilization and its Discontent, 
by Sigmund Freud). Modern concern about stress seems to 
be the obvious result. The Buddha seems to have come up 
with a better solution, by proposing the goal of tranquillity, 
which is confirmed by modern experts on stress management 
(relaxation response). It appears that if Freud saw that the 
sublimation of energy had to be achieved through the pursuit 
25
of tranquillity, civilized man would not be discontented. This 
point will be discussed in detail below.
 Sigmund Freud
In order to make this method of the Buddha intelligible 
to the modern Western mind, it is necessary to start by drawing 
attention to a few more discoveries of Sigmund Freud, 
the father of modern psychotherapy, and the originator of 
modern thought on psychotherapy. Quite contrary to the 
common opinion that Sigmund Freud was against religion, 
it must be pointed out that he was only critical of the belief 
in a Creator God, as found in theistic religions. He was not 
against the humanistic religions like Buddhism. In fact, 
he was reiterating  some of the teachings of the Buddha. 
This has been clearly explained by Eric Fromm, the Neo-
Freudian psychoanalyst, in his book, Psychoanalysis and 
Religion. 
Freud discovered several important facts concerning 
the human experience, which the Buddha had pointed to, 
nearly twenty-five centuries before him. Though Freud 
presented, in his own way, the basic problem of the human 
experience and suggested a solution, this solution could only 
convert abnormal suffering into normal unhappiness. 
The Buddha spoke of almost this same problem in greater 
detail and offered a more proficient solution, through the 
conscious expansion of the human consciousness. It was 
more proficient because it was able to transform normal 
unhappiness into supernormal happiness. 
26
This claim could be seen from modern standards  
as rather extravagant, but on a closer examination of 
the methods adopted by the Buddha, one finds that its 
probability is not easily challenged. The approach taken in 
this paper will be to present this problem and its solution, 
first as Freud saw it, and then as the Buddha explained 
it. The purpose of comparing Buddhist psychology with 
Freudian psychoanalytical thinking is not to support either 
Freudian thinking or Buddhist thinking but to facilitate 
the modern Western mind to comprehend the importance 
of the profound teachings of the Buddha, in relation to the 
practice of psychotherapy, using ideas already familiar to the 
Western mind. This also points to an agreement between the 
two ways of thought, Western and Eastern. This even shows 
that Buddhism is not a mere religion of faith and worship, 
but a psychotherapy that can make a profitable contribution 
to modern psychotherapeutic thinking. 
Psychic Determinism
There are three main types of hypothesis that Freud 
presented at three different periods in his life, which seem 
to have an important significance, seen from a Buddhist 
standpoint. The first idea he presented was psychic 
determinism. What Freud meant by this term was that the 
subjective mental processes arise and continue, depending 
on the presence of necessary conditions, just as physical 
processes in the objective physical world do. It was after 
the 18th century, during the Age of Enlightenment, that the 
Western world came to recognize the law of determinism in 
nature. 
27
In ancient times, primitive men thought that thunder, 
lightning and other natural phenomena were due to the 
activity of invisible spirits who controlled the external 
world. When modern scientists discovered how thunder, 
lightning, and other such phenomena occurred, the belief 
in supernatural spirits was discarded. What they discovered 
was the law of determinism, which means that every natural 
occurrence in the world was determined by the presence of 
necessary conditions. This idea is generally accepted today 
even by school children. Yet unfortunately even in modern 
times almost everyone believes that the thinking, speaking, 
and physical behaviour of a person are activities done by a 
spirit living inside every human body, which is called the 
“self” or the “soul.”
It was Freud who pointed out, in the West, by 
using the term “psychic determinism,” that even mental 
processes follow the law of determinism. This means, 
there is no “person” or “self” inside our body doing the 
thinking, speaking, or acting; it is only the workings of a 
mental process, similar to the workings of a mechanically 
worked engine, radio, or television set, whose workings are 
determined by the necessary conditions. The mind of the 
driver that drives a car at high speed is as mechanical as 
the engine that pulls the car, even though we like to think 
otherwise. 
It is interesting to note what Dr. Wilder Penfield 
Director and Neurosurgeon of the Montreal Neurological 
Institute of McGill University says in his book The Mystery 
of the Mind: 
28
“Throughout my own scientific career, like other 
scientists, I have struggled to prove that the brain accounts 
for the mind. But now, perhaps, the time has come when we 
may profitably consider the evidence as it stands, and ask 
the question: Do brain mechanisms account for the mind? 
Can the mind be explained by what is now known about the 
brain? If not, which is the more reasonable of the two possible 
hypotheses: that man’s being is based on one element, or on 
two? On the basis of either hypothesis the nature of the mind 
remains, still, a mystery that science has not solved.”
Twenty-five centuries before Freud, and also the 
modern scientists, the Buddha brought this fact to the attention 
of the people of India. The Buddha called this principle of 
psychic determinism “The Sequence of Antecedents” 
(paticca samuppada),4 and presented an in-depth exposition 
of this fact. This fact is the basic principle  underlying the 
philosophy of the Buddha. He even identified his entire 
teaching with this Sequence of Antecedents: “He who sees 
the Dhamma sees the Sequence of Antecedents; he who 
sees the Sequence of Antecedents sees the Dhamma.”
Freud, being a neurologist, clearly saw that the mind 
was not an entity separate from the body but only an activity 
of the nervous system. He saw the mind as a continuous 
process of activity  that started with sensory stimulation 
and ended with motor activity. It was the reaction of the 
organism to environmental stimulation. He compared this 
process to the activity of a telescope. It was a chain reaction 
starting with sensory perception, which was followed by 
4 This translation is a more accurate and more meaningful one than the common 
“dependent origination.”
29
an interpretation in the brain of what is perceived using 
memory. This then resulted in an emotional arousal, 
followed by the release of tension in action. The emotional 
arousal produced tension in the muscles of the body. This 
tension was uncomfortable, and therefore it was removed by 
the release of tension in action.  
This release of tension in action, he called the 
secondary process. The emotional arousal always 
accompanies a mental image of what is desired, of what 
is hated, or of what is feared. That he called the memory 
image. The secondary process begins with this mental 
image, and it continues by planning to get what is desired, 
to get rid of what is hated, or to run away from what is 
feared. The plan is made using a mental image of the future, 
using the cognitive process, of intelligence, and reason. 
This secondary process, however, can also be inhibited, 
by feelings of shame, and moral considerations, due to the 
activity of the conscience. Inhibition can also occur due to 
the cognitive considerations of consequences and fear. This 
inhibition (cētanā) will be discussed in more detail later.
The Unconscious
The second important idea presented by Freud was 
the idea of the unconscious. He compared the mind to an 
iceberg, because a greater part of our mental activity occurs 
without our knowledge. We are conscious of objects but we 
do not know how we become conscious of these objects. 
Just as we do not know how our body is made up and how 
it functions, we do not know how our mind is made up 
30
or how it works. This is why we go to a doctor when we 
are sick, or psychotherapist when we are mentally disturbed; 
the doctor and the therapist are supposed to know more than 
we do, about our own body and mind. This is why Freud 
compared the mind to an iceberg,  where its greater part is 
submerged under the water, and only the small tip is visible 
above the water. Our consciousness is limited, especially 
the consciousness of our subjective mental processes and 
our memories. A greater part of our mind is beyond our 
awareness and therefore unconscious. The mind, however, 
is not a solid entity like the iceberg, but an activity like a 
flame. Its continuity depends on conditions. The activity 
is mainly the reaction of our body to environmental 
stimulation.
It is because a greater part of our mind is unconscious 
that it is so difficult to control the mind. Often our effort to 
control the mind is like trying to turn off an electric light 
by breaking the bulb, because we do not know where the 
switch lies. This unconsciousness or unawareness of our 
mental processes is because our attention is constantly 
focused on external circumstances and not on our mental 
processes. We often blame our circumstances, quite unaware 
that our worries are created within us, unconsciously. This 
is why it is important to be introspective.  Introspection, 
however, is only “looking” within (sati). It is only when 
introspection becomes observation (sampajaŋŋa), which is 
“seeing” within, that it is perfected through the development 
of “insight.” Our problem therefore is that we are not fully 
conscious of the mental processes that go on within us. It is 
only through introspection that we can become conscious 
31
of these unconscious processes. The ultimate aim of Freud 
therefore was to “make the unconscious conscious,” as 
Eric Fromm constantly reminds us, and it has to be done 
through introspection. 
Freud also divided the consciousness into three parts: 
the conscious, the preconscious, and the unconscious. 
(1)  The conscious part is like the tip of the iceberg. It 
is the mental activity that is going on in the present. 
(2)  The preconscious is that part of the memory that 
can easily be recalled. It is like the part of the 
iceberg that is just under the water and is visible. 
(3)  The unconscious is like the greater part of the 
iceberg that is submerged in the water and is 
invisible. What is in the unconscious cannot be 
recalled unless by a special technique. 
This analogy is only an aid to understanding the mental 
process. It is not to be taken literally. It is necessary to 
repeat that the mind should not be seen as a solid entity like 
the iceberg, but as a process of activity like a flame. 
The Structural Hypothesis
 Having dealt with the basic principles of “psychic 
determinism,” and the “unconsciousness,” which Freud 
discovered, we shall go on to discuss the very meaningful 
proposition of Freud, which is called the structural 
hypothesis. This hypothesis is presented not as a fact or 
truth, but as a provisional theory to explain the workings 
32
of the mind, in health and disease. It is the division of the 
personality into three parts:
Id =  the affective process (dominated by the Pleasure 
principle)
Ego =  the cognitive process (dominated by the Reality 
principle)
Super ego =  the conscience (dominated by the Morality 
principle)
It is so very important to constantly remind ourselves 
that we are biological organisms struggling to exist in 
a hostile environment by unconsciously reacting to 
oppositions in the environment. Many are the kinds of 
oppositions in the environment. 
(1)  The body we are born with have only five senses, 
each reacting only to one kind of disturbance. 
These reactions come in the form of seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting, and touching. This reaction is 
called perception.
(2)  In the human body the reaction is first cognitive,  
in that we perceive some object or occurrence in 
the environment, and then we interpret what we 
perceive as pleasant, unpleasant or dangerous. 
(3)  According to how we interpret what we perceive, 
an emotional arousal takes place, such as a desire 
for the pleasant object, a hatred of the unpleasant 
object or a fear of the dangerous object. 
33
(4)  This leads to tension, which makes us 
uncomfortable. This discomfort forces us to 
release the tension in action, to obtain what is 
desired, to get rid of what is hated, or to run away 
from what is feared. Once the tension is released, 
we feel comfortable again. This way we return 
to the original equilibrium. 
This tendency of the mind to release tension and 
come to a comfortable state of equilibrium Freud called the 
pleasure principle. This was why Freud defined pleasure 
as the release of tension. Both the mind and the body tend 
to return to the original equilibrium, with the release of 
tension. This tendency to release tension is therefore called 
homeostasis. This original state of equilibrium that one 
returns to is what is generally called mental health. 
Just as the body fails to return to equilibrium when 
there is an obstacle to it such as a bacterial or virus infection, 
a congenital defect, or an accidental injury; similarly, our 
mental process fails to return to equilibrium if there are 
obstacles such as, not being able to obtain what is desired, not 
being able to get rid or what is hated, and not being able to run 
away from what is feared. This inability to release tension 
is what is generally called unhappiness - Freud called 
it “unpleasure” and Buddha called it dukkha. (yampiccan 
nalabati tampi dukkhan). The release of tension is what 
is generally called happiness. Freud called it “pleasure.” 
Buddha called it sukha. Usually, we are not conscious of 
this process in its entirety, we are conscious only of our 
compulsive urge, the discomfort when it is not carried out, 
and the comfort when it is carried out. Freud pointed out 
34
that we also tend to defend these urges at all costs, if we feel 
guilty about them. We tend to hide them by means of various 
defensive mechanisms such as rationalization. 
Here, Freud is in agreement with the Buddha. These 
defensive mechanisms are called vancana dhamma in 
Buddhism. The Buddha pointed out that we also tend to 
personalize this emotional urge (upādāna) thinking: “this 
urge is mine,” (ētaŋ mama) “I desire,” “I hate,” or “I fear.” 
The emotional urge, with its tension, that compulsively 
seeks release in action is what the Buddha  called tanhā 
(commonly translated as craving). He saw that this emotional 
urge was compulsive (nandi rāga sahagatā), repetitive 
(pōnōbhavikā), and variable in object choice and satisfaction 
(tatra tatra abhinandani). 
Freud thought, however, that this urge was instinctual, 
which meant that it was inborn and therefore unavoidable, 
but he described it in the same words: compulsive, 
repetitive and variable in object choice. Freud called 
the compulsive emotional urge the id, which is the Latin 
for the word “it.” Freud placed the emotional urge in the 
neuter gender because it was a mechanical process. The 
infant’s personality is mainly the id; this is why the infant 
is referred to as “it.” The infant does not think rationally. It is 
unable to satisfy its desires without help from the mother or 
the baby sitter. Freud saw that the id was seeking pleasure 
and avoiding pain. He saw this tendency as the “pleasure 
principle.” In other words, the id was dominated by the 
pleasure principle.
35
As the child is brought up in society, and trained to 
behave, he is taught what is right and wrong, good and 
bad, and thus a conscience is built up, which makes him 
feel guilty when he makes a mistake in behaviour. This 
conscience will often prohibit him from getting what is 
wanted, getting rid of what is not wanted, and running away 
from what is feared. It is this conscience  that Freud called 
the superego. Some Christians identify the conscience as the 
“promptings of God.” Freud rejected that concept, although 
he called it the “super-ego.” He saw it only as a carry-over 
from the culture in which the child is brought up. Therefore 
the superego was dominated by the “morality principle.”
As the child grows up, and develops the brain, the 
rational faculty develops, enabling him to find his way 
around, and even to get what is wanted, to get rid of what is 
not wanted, or to run away from what is feared. Freud called 
the rational faculty the ego, meaning “self.” By this word he 
did not mean a real entity such as a “soul.” For him the ego 
was only a faculty, which is the mental process of thinking 
or reasoning. It is probable that he used this word due to the 
influence of Descartes who said, “I think, therefore I am.” 
This ego that can think and reason out, and become aware 
of the world around, Freud thought, was dominated by the 
“reality principle.” 
Instincts
As mentioned above Freud saw the id as an “instinctual 
drive,” which came from within the organism, even though 
it was excited by external stimuli. Freud saw the mind as an 
36
energy system or machine, and he saw the machine needed 
energy to run. The energy, he saw, was in the id. That energy 
he called the libido. He saw the id as the source of energy 
(libido), which is used up by the ego as well as the super 
ego. Thus, ultimately, both the ego and the super ego work 
for the benefit of the id. It is the id that needs pleasure and 
comfort as well as the need to survive. Freud observed this 
in the neurotic personalities he was examining. Freud saw 
the id as the main part of the personality, though it was 
blind and unable to do anything. The ego and the superego 
were seen as employees working for the benefit of the id, to 
carry out orders and to protect it. They also used the energy 
of the id, to do the work. Freud also saw, however, that even 
in the normal personality, both the ego and the super ego 
work for the wellbeing and preservation of the organism. 
Freud saw the instinctual impulse of the id as the instinct 
of self-preservation called eros. Later he also spoke of the 
“death wish,” which he called thanatos.
 As mentioned earlier, the Buddha  referred to this 
same compulsive emotional urge as “thirst” (tanha), which 
Freud referred to as the id. He called it thirst because it 
is not something wilfully done by a person or self; it is 
something that unconsciously occurs following the law of 
determinism. Why the Buddha used the term tanha to refer 
to this emotional urge seems to be the same reason as that of 
Freud, when he chose the term id. It was because emotion 
was almost a mechanical process. The Buddha also saw that 
the “thirst” (tanha) is in three forms:
(1) kama tanha (the urge to enjoy pleasure)
37
(2) bhava tanha (the urge to continue being)
(3)  vibhava tanha (the urge to stop the unpleasant 
being). 
The first two comes under Freud’s eros and the third 
comes under thanatos. It is necessary to understand at this 
point that the term bhava is commonly mistranslated as 
“becoming.” The correct translation is “being” or “existence.” 
It is also necessary to know the terms used by the Buddha to 
refer to the id, ego and superego. 
(1) id = the Affective (citta)
(2) ego = the cognitive (mano) 
(3) super ego = the moralistic (hiri ottappa)
The Buddha also saw that normally people are carried 
away by these emotional impulses. In other words, the 
emotions, or the affective (citta) dominates the life of human 
beings. The Buddha expresses this idea in a verse in the 
Dhammapada:
“Emotions dominate the world
Cittēna nīyati lōkō
Emotions create distress 
Cittēna parikassati
Emotion is that one thing
Cittassa ēka dhammassa
To which all are spellbound”
Sabbēva vasamanvagu
    (Dhammapada). 
38
Emotions are the animal part of mankind that controls 
mankind. The thinking cognitive faculty (mano) is really 
catering to the whims and fancies of the unintelligent childish, 
animalistic, and affective (citta). This fact was recognized by 
Freud but he took it for granted. This activity of the cognitive 
ego is like that of the unwise parent catering to the whims of 
the child, while the wise parent (super ego) keeps objecting 
to it. 
The Buddha spoke of the id and the ego of Freud as two 
functions of the body, which we commonly refer to as mind: 
affective (citta), and cognitive (mano). The Buddha saw that 
even though the emotional urge was strong and compulsive, it 
is “blind to reality” (moha). He also saw that the mind should 
be dominated not by the emotional citta but by the rational 
mano. He also saw that it was also possible to make this 
happen because the citta becomes activated only according 
to the way the cognitive (mano) interprets circumstances. 
He saw that “cognition precedes all experience and even 
dominates and creates them”. This fact is referred to in the 
first verse in the Dhammapada.
Cognition precedes all experience
Manō pubbangamā dhammā 
Cognition dominates and creates
Manō setthā manō mayā
With faulty cognition 
Manasā cē padutthēna
If one speaks or acts
Bhāsati vā karoti vā
39
Pain does follow
Thathō nam dukkhamanvēti
As the wheel the drawer
Cakkhanva vahatōpadan 
    __Dhammapada 1&2
This is where the Buddha  appears to differ from 
Freud. Buddha does not think that the ego has to be the 
servant of the id, though initially it has been. To understand 
this fully, we need to refer to the latest discoveries of the 
neuroscientific researchers. It was the neuroscientist Paul 
MacLean MD, formerly of the National Institute of Mental 
Health (NIMH), that developed a model of the brain’s 
structure, which he called the “Triune Brain.” He identified 
three parts of our brain:
(1) Brain stem = Reptilian or old brain = (viŋŋāna)
(2) Limbic system = Mammalian or mid brain = (citta)
(3) Neocortex = human or new brain = (mano)
MacLean found that our brain acts like three 
interconnected biological computers. These three parts have 
evolved in three stages during the long period of evolution. 
The wonderful thing is that the Buddha has referred to these 
three stages in a different way by using three words: viŋŋāna, 
citta, and mano, which refers exactly to these three stages of 
evolution. What the Buddha pointed out was that: 
(1)  The term viŋŋāna referred to sensory perception, 
the work of the brain stem.
40
(2)  The term citta referred to the emotional, or affective 
work of the limbic system. 
(3)  The term mano referred to the cognitive work of 
the neocortex. 
The aim of the Buddha was to show mankind how to 
transcend the animalistic emotional part of mankind that 
craves for sensual pleasure (kama tanha), hates and fears 
pain (vibhava tanha), and struggles to maintain an existence 
of a “self” (bhava tanha) that does not really exist. The 
cognitive mano is able to comprehend the reality of life, 
which is the instability (anicca) of every perceived object, 
because they depend on necessary conditions, which are also 
unstable due to dependence. What is unstable is unpleasant 
(dukkha) because it frustrates the desire for stability. What is 
unpleasant is not as one wants, and therefore not under one’s 
power. 
What is not under one’s power does not belong to one. 
Therefore, it is not one’s personal property. What is not one’s 
property is impersonal. Therefore, all perceived objects are 
impersonal (sabbe dhamma anatta). 
This means although the emotional citta is dominating 
the mind of the normal human being, the citta can be brought 
under control by the cognitive mano by becoming aware of 
the realities of life. This is because the citta gets excited 
only according to the way the cognitive mano interprets 
circumstances (mano pubbangama dhamma). 
Joseph LeDoux a neuroscientist at the Centre for Neural 
Science at the New York University says that his research 
41
has shown that sensory signals from eye or ear travel first to 
the thalamus in the brain and then to the amygdala; while a 
second signal from the thalamus is routed to the neocortex, the 
thinking brain. This two-way branching allows the amygdala 
to begin to respond before the neocortex, which mulls 
information through several levels of brain circuits before 
it fully perceives and finally initiates its more finely tailored 
response. This is called an amygdala hijack (Emotional 
Intelligence by Daniel Goleman pg.20). What this means 
is that in the lower mammals where the thinking faculty is 
not fully developed they react emotionally to situations but 
in the human being the thinking faculty mano can respond 
rationally to situations instead.
During evolution the id (mammalian brain) came into 
being before the ego (neocortex). This explains the reason 
why the id dominates the ego. Freud did see this partly when 
he said: “the ego is in control when the id is weak.” Yet he 
did not realize that the ego activity can change the id activity 
in the human being, and therefore the human being has the 
power to put an end to the id activity. This fact has, however, 
been recognized by modern cognitive psychologists, though 
they have not fully made use of it to control the id radically. 
Yet the Buddha comprehended this fully and made use of 
it to totally eradicate lust, hate and delusion of “self” from 
his system (Ref: seven steps to awakening = satta bojjanga).
This miscalculation of Freud lies in the fact that Freud 
did not consider the difference between the animal and the 
human being. He saw the mind as a machine that needed 
energy to work, and he saw that the energy came from the id. 
Therefore the id is dominant, like the weak millionaire who 
42
employs others to do his work. It is true that the id has all the 
energy, but in the human being, it is the ego that is in control 
of that energy, just as the driver, and not the engine, is in 
control of the motor vehicle. Though the engine contains all 
the energy.
Freud saw this id and its energy as an inborn instinct 
that has its origin within the organism, and therefore cannot 
be removed, but only expressed, suppressed, repressed, 
or sublimated. Repression is an unconscious process of 
forgetting the urge, out of fear or shame. Suppression is 
a conscious process of denial of gratification of the urge. 
Sublimation is to gratify the urge only within the bounds of 
social acceptability. The Buddha, on the other hand, saw 
the impulse as a process that has its origin outside, in the 
environment. It is the environmental stimulation that 
leads to the excitation of the impulse. Therefore, he called it 
an influx or “influence” (asava) that flows in from outside, 
rather than an instinct that flows out from inside. 
The Buddha pointed out that the mood, temperament, 
or disposition of a person is essentially pure and calm in 
its normal state.5 It is polluted or disturbed by adventitious 
pollutants; just as water is a pure substance, and it becomes 
impure only due to foreign matter falling into it. Therefore, 
just as water can be purified through filtration or distillation, 
the Buddha saw that the temperament too could be purified 
and calmed through a systematic technique, because it is 
essentially pure and is always trying to return to its original 
purity.
5 Pabassaraŋ idaŋ bhikkhave cittaŋ agantuka upakkilesena upakkilittaŋ (Anguttara 
Nikaya I, VI, 1.) 
43
The temperament, oh disciples, is essentially pure
(pabassaramidaŋ bhikkave cittaŋ)
Only foreign pollutants, pollute it
(tancakō āgantukēhi upakkilēsēhi upakkilitthaŋ)
Unknown is this fact to common folk
(tan assutavā putujjanō yatābhūtaŋ nappajānãti)
For them, no purity, I declare
(tasmã assutavatōputujjanassa cittabhāvanā nattīti 
vadāmīti)
     __(Ang.I.6)
 
Buddha On The Structural Hypothesis
One might ask at this point whether the Buddha ever 
spoke about anything like the structural hypothesis of Freud. 
In fact, he did, but in different words. He used an analogy 
referring to three kinds of people in the world (Gradual 
Sayings I, p111, 29.).
(1) One is blind in both eyes, 
(2) Second is blind only in one eye, 
(3) Third has vision in both eyes. 
The first eye sees how to satisfy one’s desires (ego). 
The second eye sees what is good and bad (super ego) 
44
On comparison with the structural hypothesis: 
(1) The person with both eyes blind is the id = (citta)
(2)  The person with the eye to see how to satisfy 
desires is the ego = (mano)
(3)  The person with the eye that sees what is good and 
bad is the super ego = (hiri-ottappa) 
The super ego, or Conscience is called hiri-ottappa, 
Hiri = Reluctance to do evil; and 
Ottappa = Repentance after having done evil
Problem Presented By Freud
What Freud saw, as the problem, was that the id comes 
in conflict with the ego and the super ego. The id is unaware 
of the external reality and it demands immediate satisfaction. 
The id is aware only of what it wants; it is not concerned 
about how it is obtained. The ego on the other hand is aware 
of the external reality, and only the ego knows how to gratify 
the id. The ego wants to gratify the id, but it can be gratified 
only within the confines of reality. Immediate gratification 
is not always possible. Therefore, the ego might have to 
postpone gratification. This, the id does not like. The id is 
uncomfortable till it is gratified. 
This conflict, between the id and the ego, sounds very 
much like the familiar conflict between the child and the 
mother. The child cries for food but only the mother knows 
how to get it. But then, the mother has to prepare it before the 
child can have it. This takes time. Therefore, the satisfaction 
45
has to be postponed. But the child wants food immediately, 
and is unconcerned about how it can be got. The child 
remains hungry and cries till the food is given. The child, 
according to Freud, is mainly the id, and is dominated by 
the pleasure principle. The emotionally mature adult, on the 
other hand, whose ego is strong, is dominated by the reality 
principle. Even in the emotionally immature adult, the ego is 
in control, even though it is weak.
If the child makes demands that are detrimental to it 
as well as to others, and the mother is undecided, in such a 
case the father may intervene and demand that the mother 
must not cater to the child’s irresponsible demands. If the 
mother follows the father’s advice, the child will not be 
satisfied at all, and it will continue to cry. So the mother has 
to find a way of satisfying the child while at the same time 
following the father’s advice. This is an analogy where the 
father represents the super ego, the mother represents the 
ego, and the child represents the id. The super ego does not 
deal with the id directly, but only through the ego. The ego is 
always in control even when it is weak. The ego has to find 
ways of satisfying the id as well as the super ego. The ego 
becomes the mediator between the id, the super ego, and also 
the external reality.
Mental Sickness
It is when the ego is weak that the conflict is not 
resolved, and the personality becomes sick. This means, 
the ego tries to push away the conflict and forgets about it. 
When this happens the ego is unable to pay full attention to 
46
the external reality and deal with it, because the unresolved 
internal conflict starts pestering the ego for attention. When 
this happens, the society in which the individual lives 
becomes intolerant and begins to condemn the individual for 
the negligence of responsibilities. This makes the individual 
become withdrawn from society and feel and behave as an 
invalid. The individual regresses into a childhood mode of 
behaviour. This is a description of the neurotic personality. 
The neurotic, though withdrawn from the external social 
reality, is fully aware of it.
 The psychotic, on the other hand, withdraws from 
the social reality totally. He does not pay attention to it. He 
lives in a world of his own making, though he is aware of 
the physical reality around. In doing so, he loses his social 
identity, and acquires a physical identity. If he identifies with 
the physical body, he may experience himself as a robot, or if 
he identifies himself with the totality of the physical reality, 
he may experience himself even as God. He experiences as 
himself whatever he identifies with.
Ego Psychology 
It is important to understand that Freud spoke about 
mental and physical processes, and not about real persons. 
What is called his “personality theory” is only a mechanical 
theory of personality. He called it the “psychic apparatus.” 
In other words, he saw the personality to be an impersonal 
process of psychophysical activity. Therefore, his theory is 
also called the psychodynamic theory. Although Freud saw 
the personality as a mechanical process of activity comparable 
47
to a machine, or an energy system, some of his followers 
were dissatisfied with the depersonalization and reification of 
the personality. Some later psychologists and psychoanalysts 
who were existentialist thinkers, like R.D.Lang, criticized this 
way of thinking, considering it to be a dehumanizing of the 
human being, through “depersonalization” and “reification” 
of the human personality. (The divided self, by R.D.Lang). 
This latter way of thinking among psychoanalysts came to 
be called “Ego Psychology.” 
 Freud saw the ego only as an impersonal faculty of 
reasoning, the main concern of which was to manage the id 
impulses, and to resolve the conflict between the id and the 
superego, as well as to deal with the external reality. Later 
followers saw the ego as the “real self” whose main concern 
was to deal with the external reality. They were mainly 
concerned with the development of the “sense of self” and 
the strengthening of the “ego” to deal with the external world. 
Freud pointed out that the “sense of self” is formed 
through the infant’s relationship with the mother. This 
relationship with the mother was seen as an “object 
relationship,” where the mother was the object. As Freud saw 
it, the infant does not see the mother as a separate entity from 
itself, at the beginning. It is later that the infant notices that 
the mother appears at times, and disappears at other times, 
and that the mother is not under its control, as its own legs 
or arms are. This makes it feel that the mother is a person 
separate from itself, and so a “sense of self” is formed. 
Then a relationship of dependence on the mother develops. 
In this relationship, frustrations and disappointments are 
experienced. These remain as memories, which affect 
48
relationships with other people in later life. These memories 
also affect the self-concept or self- image in later life, where 
the “self” can be felt to be weak or strong, resulting in 
feelings of inferiority or superiority, or what is today called 
lack of self-esteem.
Later followers of Freud became concerned with the 
development of the sense of self, which they identified as 
the ego. This psychology based on the concern with the 
ego and its relations with external reality was called “ego 
psychology,” or “object relations psychology.” The earlier 
concern with the id, and its conflict with the ego and superego, 
was called id psychology, which was rejected by the later 
followers of Freud who became interested in ego psychology. 
This new turn took place when the psychoanalysts became 
concerned with psychosis, which, they thought, was rooted 
in the ego’s relationship with external reality, and the change 
in the “sense of self.” Formerly, Freud’s main concern was 
neurosis, though his concern always extended to psychosis 
as well.
The Buddha’s Approach 
Having discussed some of Freud’s discoveries and how 
he and some of his later followers tried to conceptualize the 
problems of human beings both normal and abnormal, let us 
now examine some of the Buddha’s teachings in relation to 
these findings of Freud and the Freudians. 
The essence of the problem encountered by Freud as 
well as the Buddha is that the human being is an evolved 
49
thinking animal with a cognitive mano (ego) that has 
become aware of a reality that is not catering to the whims of 
the affective citta (id). This thinking animal is also possessed 
with a civilized conscience hiri ottappa (super ego) that 
demands a morality to be peaceful.
The solution offered by Freud was ‘sublimation of 
the id impulses’ while the followers preferred to change the 
method to ‘gratification of the cognitive ego’. The solution 
of the Buddha, however, was the tranquillization of the 
affective citta or id. This sums up the solution seen from 
different perspectives.
The Buddhist Perspective
Seen from the Buddhist perspective, we are all born 
as organisms struggling to exist in a hostile environment. 
We are born with a body with five senses: eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, and body. With the five senses we experience five 
sensations (saññā) and three kinds of feelings (vēdanā): 
pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral. We react emotionally to 
the feelings in three ways:
(1) Urge for enjoyment of pleasure (kāma tanhā)
(2) Urge for continued existence (bhava tanhā)
(3) Urge for non-existence of pain (vibhava tanhā)
These emotional urges are never gratified fully the way 
we want, or when we want, because every event depends on 
the necessary conditions. What is dependent on conditions 
is unstable, unpleasant, and impersonal. This unsatisfactory 
condition creates grief, lamentation, pain, depression, and 
50
exhaustion. This is what is today known as stress, which is 
presented by Hans Selye as the General Adaptation Syndrome 
(GAS). This was what the Buddha presented as suffering, or 
anguish (dukkha).
What is called life is a mission impossible that 
began quite unconsciously when the necessary conditions 
were present. Certain electromagnetic forces by accident 
produced a self-replicating molecule, which was able to 
produce molecules of its own kind, by absorbing atoms 
from the surroundings. Every molecule produced of course 
had to die but new molecules kept on being produced. So a 
bipolar process continued: one productive called anabolism, 
and another destructive called catabolism. Together they 
were called metabolism. What continued therefore was this 
struggle, which was not a static existence  but a dynamic 
evanescence similar to a flame, which is a continuity of 
birth and death, which is called mortality.
Buddha also saw the mind as a psychophysical 
sequential process beginning with perception at the senses, 
leading to an interpretation of what is perceived by the 
thinking cognitive mano, followed by an emotional reaction 
(cittāvēga) that ends up in a notion of self that is born, grows 
old, and dies. Emotions aroused are physically expressed 
through motor activity (kamma) followed by consequences 
(vipāka). He saw it occurring in three main sequences: (1) 
the sensory Perception (viŋŋāna), the cognitive conception 
(mano), (2) the affective, emotional agitation (cittāvēga), 
and (3) the active, expression of emotion through release of 
tension in action. This emotional reaction occurs, however, 
quite unconsciously. When we are conscious, on the other 
51
hand, we are able to comprehend the possible consequences, 
and then respond quite rationally to avoid bad consequences.
Unconscious action = stimulus → emotion ---- 
emotional action = (reaction)
Conscious action = stimulus → cognition ---- 
rational action = (response)
The presence of mind through introspection (sati) and 
reflecting on the consequences (sampajañña), before the 
release of tension, can prevent the consequences detrimental 
to oneself and others. Reflection on the action and its 
consequences (cetana) can stop the action from being repeated 
in the future. Absent minded, and impulsive behaviour, 
which is unconsciously done, can be called a reaction, which 
the Buddha called an “unskilful action” (akusala kamma). 
A rational action done with presence of mind, which is 
consciously executed, can be called a response, which the 
Buddha called a “skillful action” (kusala kamma).
This rational decision called cetana before action was 
what the Buddha, equated to karma (cētanā ahan bhikkavē 
kamman vadāmi). This decision (cetanā) is commonly 
called willpower, which can stop emotional behaviour. It is 
important to understand that this decision (cetanā) is a power 
exhibited by the human being, which distinguishes him from 
the animal. This decision is not possible for the animals. The 
animals passively react to stimulation of the senses, while 
the human being can get sufficient time to decide (cetana) 
what action to take in a given situation. Yet it is also possible 
for the human being to react suddenly to a loud sound, and 
in a few seconds decide it is harmless and relax. Modern 
52
researchers in neuroscience have pointed out the reason for 
this as an amygdala hijack, which was already discussed in 
detail (Ref: Emotional Intelligence by Daniel Goleman).
Personalization
The teaching of the Buddha about personalization 
(upadana) is very significant, in relation to Freud’s structural 
hypothesis. Buddha spoke of four kinds of personalization as 
follows:
1.  Personalization of likes and dislikes for pleasure 
and pain (kāma upādāna) = (id)
2.  Personalization of rational thoughts about reality 
(ditthi upādāna) = (ego)
3.  Personalization of moral principles (sīlabbata 
upādāna) = (superego)
4.  Personalization of the notion of self (atta vāda 
upādāna)
The structural hypothesis of Freud was similar to 
what the Buddha was aware of. The Buddha, however, also 
added a fourth factor to it - the notion of “self” through 
personalization. This means he pointed out that the problem 
presented by Freud was created by personalization of the 
factors and thus creating the sense of “self.” Modern research 
in neuroscience has begun to confirm the mechanistic view 
of Sigmund Freud and the Buddha. 
53
The structural hypothesis of Freud
id –  the emotional urge dominated by the pleasure 
principle
ego –  the rational faculty dominated by the reality 
principle
superego –  the conscience dominated by the morality 
principle
It is clear that there is a parallelism between Freud’s 
structural hypothesis and the Buddha’s account of 
personalization. Freud considered the id, the ego, and the 
superego as structural divisions of the personality. This 
means he “personalized” these three structural parts and 
transformed it into a “personality” or “self.” Even the use of 
the terms ego and superego implies that a concept of “self” 
underlies the hypothesis. The id, which is the Latin for “it,” 
implies that Freud “depersonalized” the id as a mechanical 
process. It seems that Freud called the rational part the ego 
following Descartes’ idea, “I think therefore I am.” (cogito 
ergo sum). The superego was also seen as a part of the ego. 
This is why it was named as such. This means, the concept of 
“self” remains in hiding in the structural hypothesis, even 
though Freud considered the mind or personality to be an 
energy system or machine. This helped his followers to lay 
stress on the “ego,” and want to make it even more real. 
The Buddha’s fourfold personalization points out that 
the problem was in the personalization of the structural 
hypothesis. Freud had personalized the id, ego, and the 
superego, in calling them parts of the personality. Although 
54
Freud compared the mind to a machine or energy system, 
even calling it the “psychic apparatus,” and even speaking 
about psychic determinism, it appears that he could not get 
the idea of “self” as “personality” out of his mind. This 
is why this hypothesis is also called the personality theory 
of Freud. This means that Freud did not really make a full 
depersonalization of the personality. 
The later followers of Freud carried the idea of 
personality even further. They criticized Freud for seeing 
the ego only as the rational faculty. They wanted the ego to 
represent a real person or “self.” The ego psychology, or 
object relations psychology that resulted was interested in 
the relationship between the “self” and the external world. 
  In psychoanalytic therapy, the aim of Freud was to 
integrate these three parts of the personality. Neurosis and 
psychosis was seen as a disintegration of the personality. 
In explaining neurosis, Freud thought that the id, being a 
part of the personality, is denied expression, and is rejected 
by the ego through repression. 
Buddha And The Freudians
While the later Freudians complain that Freud 
did not emphasize the idea of “self” enough, or that 
Freud depersonalized the personality, Buddhist thinking 
seems to do the opposite, in complaining that Freud did 
not depersonalize the personality enough. Modern 
psychologists who have become interested in Buddhism and 
Buddhist meditation find this to be problematic. Some try 
55
to bring about a compromise by saying that one has to build 
the “self” before it can be removed. Let us examine this 
problem to see if we can find a better solution.
The problem, according to Freud, is that the three 
parts of the personality are in conflict, because these three 
parts seek three different goals as follows:
id – seeks pleasure
ego  – seeks to be realistic
superego – seeks to be moral or good 
Freud did seek a medial path to solve the problem. 
This was not to seek pleasure, as the id wanted, nor was it 
repression, or suppression as the superego wanted. Freud’s 
medial path was sublimation. By the term sublimation 
Freud meant channelling the energy of the id along a socially 
acceptable path. If one is interested in sexual relations, 
instead of indulging in rape or adultery, one can get married, 
or channel the energy through a socially or religiously 
acceptable channel. 
This solution seems to be quite in agreement with 
Buddhist thinking. It represents “good conduct” (sila), 
following the five precepts, which is the common practice 
of the good Buddhist householder (gihi) or laymen. From 
the Freudian perspective, it is sublimation or the practice of 
the normal healthy personality. From the general, common 
perspective, it is the civilized way of living.
 Freud, however, thought that the civilized way of living 
resulted in discontentment, (Civilization And Its Discontent, 
by Sigmund Freud) because the satisfaction becomes limited 
56
by confining oneself to the socially acceptable way of living. 
The id is not fully satisfied. A man may not be interested in 
one wife, or woman may not be interested in one husband. 
This means discontentment. Therefore, the apparent aim of 
psychoanalysis was only to change abnormal suffering into 
normal unhappiness.
Buddha’s Solution
The Buddha went further than Freud in this matter. He 
also came up with a medial path, but this was different. He 
saw a way of integrating the personality by presenting a new 
goal to pursue. This goal was not sublimation but the goal of 
“tranquillity” of mind. Freud himself saw this possibility, 
when he said that the psychic apparatus was ultimately 
seeking a state of equilibrium through release of tension. 
But he did not see this as the solution to the conflict. The 
Buddha saw that what the emotional impulse wanted was 
the state of relaxation and mental calm, which is a state 
of happiness. When this goal of tranquillity is consciously 
pursued, not only is the id satisfied but also the ego as well 
as the superego. The id is satisfied because of the relaxation 
of tension (relaxation response). The ego is satisfied because 
relaxation does not come in conflict with reality. The 
superego is satisfied because relaxation does not come in 
conflict with moral principles or social norms. This pursuit 
of tranquillity of mind is the pursuit of NIRV ANA (nir, non 
+ vana, movement). Nirvana is the imperturbable serenity 
of mind, which even the Stoics and the Epicureans spoke of 
in the West.
57
Another important insight of the Buddha becomes 
applicable here. When Freud thought of the structural 
hypothesis, this hypothesis became useful to understand 
the mechanics of neurosis or even psychosis. Yet it had a 
shortcoming, which was that by seeing the mind as a 
structure made up of three parts that come in conflict, one 
tends to think of the mind as an entity similar to a material 
entity that occupies space and time. Even if the mind is 
considered to be immaterial, it could still be conceived as 
a spiritual entity. To compare the mind to a machine, or see 
it as a psychic apparatus, or any structure, is to see it as an 
entity that exists. This easily encourages the formation of the 
concept of “self” in relation to the mind. To personalize the 
emotions, or consider the emotions to be a part of oneself, is 
to lose control over emotions. Thus the infatuated girl may 
say: “It is my love. I love him. To remove my love is to kill 
me.” 
Buddha’s Functional Hypothesis 
In order to avoid this difficulty, the Buddha looked at 
the mind from a “functional point of view,” instead of from 
a “structural point of view.” This falls in line with Freudian 
thinking as well as Buddhist thinking. For the Buddha, the 
mind is not an entity separate from the body. What we call 
the body is not an entity but an activity observed objectively 
as a material entity that occupies space and time. What we call 
the mind is the same activity that is observed subjectively 
as a spiritual entity that occupies time but not space. Mind is 
simply the subjective experience  of the objective activity 
of the body, called the activity of the nervous system. 
58
The Buddha pointed out that there are three phases 
in this activity that we refer to as the mind. They are the 
perceptual activity (viññana), the cognitive activity (mano), 
and the affective activity (citta), which ultimately ends up in 
the physical behavioural activity (kamma). The first three 
are observable as subjective mental experiences, and not 
as objective material entities. Even the fourth is a physical 
activity, rather than a material entity. 
If we take as an example a young man meeting a girl: 
when light falling on the girl is reflected, and falls on the eye 
of the young man, he begins to see the girl. That is perception 
(viññana). Having perceived, he begins to interpret what 
was seen using his cognitive faculty (mano). Let us say, 
the interpretation is, “I see a sexy girl.” This results in an 
emotional arousal (citta). A message goes from the brain to 
the sexual gland, and a sexual hormone is secreted into the 
blood, and changes take place in the young man’s body. The 
body gets ready for action. Of course the young man being 
a civilized person does not decide to rape the girl. He has a 
conscience that prevents him from doing so. This example 
explains how the three stages of the reaction work. 
The young man, however, has a problem at this point. 
There is a conflict in his mind, as Freud pointed out. The 
conscience or superego is in conflict with his id, and the 
ego has to bring about a settlement. The ego decides to 
go and speak to the girl in a courteous way and propose a 
date. This would be a Freudian solution. Yet the young man 
may be disappointed if the girl rejects him or if he sees her 
boyfriend coming to take her away. This is civilization and 
its discontentment.
59
The Buddha goes further in suggesting a different 
solution. That is, to understand that happiness comes from 
tranquillity of mind and not from gratification of sense desires. 
Therefore, the young man should only take a deep breath and 
consciously relax the body, calm the mind, and stop thinking 
about the girl. This is not easy because the emotional arousal 
is not a mere thought. The emotion is a change in the blood 
chemistry, and change in the function of various organs in 
the body. This means, the emotion is a physical change rather 
than a mere thought. Yet it is the thought that created the 
physical change. Just as the manipulation of a switch turned 
the light on, and no amount of blowing on the light can turn it 
off; in the same way, no amount of fighting with the emotion 
can turn the emotion off. The emotion is only a disturbance 
in the body, and it is created by a thought. It is only by 
changing the thought, which got the emotion started, that the 
emotional activity can be stopped. This is a fact recognized 
even by the cognitive psychologists today. 
What this means, in Freudian terminology, is that the id 
is the result of the activity of the ego. Therefore, the ego does 
not have to repress, suppress or sublimate the id; the ego 
has only to realize that the trigger that activates the id is in 
the hands of the ego, and by thinking in a different way, the 
ego can make the id stop the annoying behaviour. It is true 
that the id contains energy, but this energy is aroused by 
the ego, (like the driver pressing the accelerator) because the 
trigger is in the hands of the ego. Just as the dog’s tail is not 
shaking by itself, it is the dog’s emotion that is shaking it. The 
dog may be unconscious of it, but by becoming conscious 
it can be stopped. If the ego changes the interpretation, of 
60
the circumstance, the id will stop demanding. The cognitive 
psychologists have begun to realize this only recently. Long 
before this the Buddha said:
Pleasant images are not pleasures in the world
Na tē kāmā yāni cittrāni lōkē
Lust for images is the pleasure of men
Sankappa rāgō purisassa kāmō
While images remain in the world as they are
Tittanti citrāni tatēva lōkē 
The wise do only rid their lust
Yatetta dhīrā vinēti candaŋ
     _Dhammapada
Freud’s Mistakes
The mistake that Freud appears to have made is his 
emphasis on instinct. He thought the emotion is inborn, 
and therefore it starts within and seeks an outlet. Because the 
emotion is inborn, Freud thought, it cannot be eliminated; 
he thought it has to be gratified in some way or another. 
The Buddha did not see the emotion as instinctual. He saw 
it as something started by an external stimulus. He saw the 
emotion as a part of a chain reaction, where the intellectual 
activity of interpretation preceded the emotional activity. 
Stating the Buddha’s position in Freudian terminology, the 
ego activity precedes the id activity. Freud, however, saw it 
the other way. He thought that the id activity preceded the 
ego activity, and that the purpose of the ego was mainly to 
61
cater to the id. This is a serious mistake that Freud made, 
from the Buddhist standpoint.
The other mistake of Freud was his breaking up the mind 
into parts that come in conflict. The ego and the id should have 
been seen as parts of a continuous process of activity, one 
leading to the other, instead of being independent activities 
opposed to one another. He did attempt this at the beginning, 
when he took up the functional approach comparing the 
mind to a telescope. It was the structural hypothesis that 
created the confusion although it did help understand the 
conflict in the mind of the neurotic. The conflict displayed by 
the structural hypothesis comes about due to the ignorance 
of the neurotic patient about how the emotional arousal 
gets started. The problem created by the neurotic is like 
pressing the accelerator and the brake at the same time, 
while driving a motor vehicle. It is the ego that arouses the 
emotion; for example, the boy appreciating the beauty of the 
girl is the work of the ego. This arouses the passionate desire 
for the girl, which is the id. Now the conscience, which is 
the superego, comes to block this arousal and tells the ego 
to stop it, and the ego holds the brake, while continuing to 
appreciate the girl. That is like holding the brake and pressing 
the accelerator at the same time. This creates the conflict 
between the id and the ego. 
The solution of the Buddha was to look at the mind from 
a functional standpoint. That is, to see the mind as a reaction 
of an organism to sensory stimulation - the reaction being 
in four stages: perception (viññana), conception (mano), 
emotion (citta), and action (kamma). This reaction is what 
creates all the trouble, as the Dhamma cakka pavattana Sutra 
62
quoted above indicates. The Buddha called this reaction a 
compulsive thirst (tanha). A thirst is not something that 
we do. It is something that happens to us. It is almost a 
mechanical process. Freud recognized this when he called it 
the id, the Latin form of “it,” the neuter gender. The trouble 
created by this thirst, the Buddha called pain (dukkha). The 
solution that the Buddha suggested was not sublimation 
but eradication, which was to take it off by the root. The 
way to uproot it is to stop the incorrect thinking, which 
arouses the emotion, and that in Freudian terms is to correct 
the ego activity. This is also the method of modern Cognitive 
Therapy today. The simple solution therefore is to observe 
what is going on by systematic introspection (satipatthāna).
Buddha’s Method
If the problem is created by the emotions, the 
cause of the emotion must be removed. To do so, one 
has to understand the problem and its solution (samma 
ditthi). When the underlying origin is comprehended, a 
reorientation of the mind takes place, which is beginning 
the pursuit of tranquillity (samma sankappa). This 
reorientation results in a different way of seeing life and 
interpreting circumstances. For example, the young man 
who met the girl and appreciated her beauty will now think 
in a different way. Instead of looking at the pleasant image 
of the body, he will begin to see the body for what it is 
from an anatomical  point of view. He begins to think of 
the skin, the flesh, the blood, the bones, the intestines, the 
faeces and all the repulsive elements contained in the body. 
He can also think of the mental condition of the girl, which 
63
could be very unpleasant, even though she may have good 
looks. This is a broader outlook than the narrow superficial 
perspective that leads to the emotional reaction. Often people 
begin to acquire the broader outlook only after marriage. 
This seems to be the reason for most divorces after marriage. 
This broader outlook is accompanied by the philosophy that 
true happiness comes through tranquillity of mind and not 
through the gratification of sense desires; and this means, 
changing the goal of life to calmness or tranquillity. 
Here we may be reminded of Alfred Adler, who 
spoke about the importance of the philosophy of life  and 
goal orientation. Yet the Buddha taught this fact twenty- 
five centuries before Adler. The Supernormal Eightfold 
Way of the Buddha is based on this principle. It begins with 
the Harmonious Perspective and the Harmonious Goal-
orientation. The extent to which the Buddha influenced 
Adler is a mystery, as it is in the case of Sigmund Freud. It 
appears that Freud was influenced by the first and second 
truths of the Buddha, while Adler was influenced by the 
fourth.
This method of the Buddha for eradicating the 
emotional reaction needs to be fully understood by modern 
psychologists, and it can be of great help in their practice, as 
well as their research. Modern research in neuroscience has 
resulted in the discovery of what is called the Triune Brain, 
which is a division of the human brain into three parts that 
point to three stages in the evolution of the human brain. These 
stages are called the reptilian brain, the mammalian brain, 
and the human brain. The reptilian brain is the primitive 
part of the human brain called the brain stem, which is 
64
mainly concerned with seeking food and reproduction. The 
mammalian brain is mainly concerned with emotions and it 
is called the limbic system. The human brain is the advanced 
part of the human brain, which deals with rational thinking. 
It is the prefrontal cerebral cortex. The wonderful thing 
is that the Buddha had referred to these three parts with 
different names and in different ways.
(1) Reptilian brain – brain stem – vinnana
(2) Mammalian brain – limbic system – citta – (id)
(3) Human brain – prefrontal cortex – mano – (ego)
It is the emotional part, the limbic system, called citta 
(id) that is unable to think, and unable to become aware of 
reality, that is going against reality and is in conflict with 
reality as well as with reason mano (ego), and even the 
conscience (super ego).
In other words, although this emotional part (citta) of 
the human being is unable to live according to reality, the 
thinking part of the human brain (mano) is able to be aware 
of reality and attempts to live realistically. This thinking 
part is not only able to become aware of the need to live 
realistically but it is also able to control the emotional citta 
(id) and live realistically. This thinking part, however, is 
unaware of its ability to control the emotional part. This is 
why the thinking mano needs to be educated to do so. This 
is where the Buddha or the therapist becomes helpful to 
the patient. 
It is important to understand that the aim of the Buddha 
was to make the human being transcend the emotional 
animal nature and become fully human. The way to do 
65
so is to get the thinking mano to dominate the life  of the 
individual. This is conveyed in the Sanskrit verse below:
Āhāra niddhrā bhaya maithunanca
Feeding, sleeping, fear, and sex
Sāmānya mēthad pasubih narānām
Common are these to man and beast
Dharmōhi tēsāmadhiko visēsō
Especial to man is thought complex
Dharmēna hīnāh pasubih samānāh
Low in thought man is a beast
How the human being could develop the thinking 
faculty and conquer the animal nature is explained in the 
following verse in the Dhammapada:
Manō pubbangamā dhammā
Cognition precedes all experience
Manō setthā manōmayā
Cognition dominates and even creates
Manasāce pasannēna
With proper cognition 
bhāsatī vā carōti vā
if one speaks or acts 
Tatō nam sukhamanvēti
happiness follows 
cāyāva ana pāyinī
As the shadow that never fails
     _Dhammapada
66
The Supernormal Eightfold Way
That Solves The Problem
1. The Harmonious Perspective
2. The Harmonious Orientation
3. The Harmonious speech
4. The Harmonious Action
5. The Harmonious Life
6. The Harmonious Exercise
7. The Harmonious Attention
8. The Harmonious Equilibrium
This Supernormal Eightfold Way helps the self-
centred suffering individual into a selfless healthy one. It 
is done through a gradual process of psychological growth 
and evolution. It has to be carried out step by step by each 
individual by himself or herself. First of all, the problem 
must be fully comprehended intellectually: its cause, its 
solution, and the way it is solved by removing the cause 
(samma ditthi). 
The problem is a conflict between the emotional id 
(citta) and the reality recognized by the thinking ego (mano). 
The solution is to resolve this conflict, not by changing 
reality but by changing the unrealistic emotional id (citta). 
This has to be done by each individual by themself and for 
themself.
(1)  First step is to understand the problem, its 
cause, its solution, and the way it can be solved. 
Confidence to do so successfully is gained by 
reflecting on the Buddha, who reached that state, 
the Dhamma, his teaching, and the Sangha, his 
67
followers, who are practicing the teaching. (sammā 
ditthi)
(2)  Next comes the reorientation of mind, towards 
the new goal of freedom from emotions and the 
tranquillity of mind. (sammā sankappa)
(3)  This leads to the practice of controlling one’s 
emotional behaviour (sila) by stopping emotional 
speech, action and lifestyle - not because others 
want one to do so, but because one understands 
the necessity to do so. This covers the three 
disciplinary steps (sammā vācā, sammā kammanta, 
and sammā ājīva,)
(4)  Next is the sixth step, which is called the 
harmonious exercise (sammā vāyāma), which is 
to learn to stop the emotional arousal. This is to 
learn to relax the body and to calm the mind, by 
focusing attention on the body and mind. This sixth 
step comprises four steps: 
(a) Guarding the senses (saŋvara)
(b)  Avoidance of memory thoughts and 
imaginary thoughts (pahāna)
(c)  Focusing attention on the body and mind 
introspectively (bhāvanā)
(d)  Maintaining the introspection throughout 
the day; 24 hrs (anurakkhana)
68
(5)  Next is the seventh step, which is Harmonious 
Attention (samma sati) where the mind is focused 
constantly inwards: on the body (kayanu passana), 
on how the body feels (vedananu passana), on the 
emotional state of the mind (cittanu passana), and 
on the cognitive thoughts that arise in the mind 
(dhammanu passana). This is what is called the 
Satipatthana Bhavana. With this one begins the 
seven steps to awakening.
(6) The Seven Steps to Awakening
(a)  Sati – When the mind is focused within 
one begins to realize that the emotional 
disturbance is caused by the thoughts that 
arise in the cognitive mano. 
(b)  Dhamma vicaya – then one begins to 
examine the thoughts and realizes that they 
are only thoughts and not necessarily truths. 
By changing the thoughts the emotions can 
be stopped.
(c)  Viriya – This brings confidence and strength 
of mind to stop the emotional agitation.
(d)  Pīti – With this comes a happiness of mind 
in the form of tranquillity.
(e)  Passaddhi – This happy tranquil mind 
relaxes the body, and the relaxed body is 
comfortable.
69
(f)  Samādhi – This silent, calm, happy, 
comfortable, stillness comprise the 
five components of the first ecstasy 
pathamajjhāna (vitakkha, vicāra, pīti, 
sukha, ekaggatā). From the first ecstasy 
one gets into the second, third, and fourth 
ecstasy. 
(g)  Upekkhā – It is at the fourth ecstasy that 
one experiences upekkhā, which means 
apperception. This is to perceive one’s 
own consciousness, or one’s own process 
of perception. With this awareness of the 
process of perception one is able to analyse 
the process of perception into the five 
components (pancakkhanda): rūpa, vēdanā, 
saŋŋā, sankhāra, viŋŋāna. 
From this realization one begins to further realize that 
from a state of complete unknowing (avijjā)  one perceives 
objects through the process of perception (avijjā paccayā 
sankhārā, sankhāra paccayā viŋŋānan, viŋŋāna paccayā 
nāma rūpan). Objects are perceived (viŋŋāna) as named 
images (nāma-rūpa). Into these named images are added 
sounds, smells, tastes, and touches by the brain (mano 
viŋŋāna) and thus produce objects that exist in time and 
space (nāma rūpa paccayā salāyatanan, salāyatana paccayā 
passō). The term passa is commonly translated as contact, 
which is an error. Passa means creating a posteriori objects, 
which are supposed to exist in time and space. 
70
Once the existing objects have been created, they 
begin to arouse feelings pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral. 
This results in emotional reactions to pleasant, unpleasant 
and neutral feelings. This creates a dichotomy between 
a subjective reaction and an objective outer experience. 
The subjective experience is personalized as mine and the 
objective experience is alienated as foreign. Personalization 
creates the personality or “self.” It is the process of perception 
and the emotional reaction that becomes the “self.” The 
“self” when pointed to as a “self” that exists in time and 
space, happens to be the “body” (sakkāya ditthi).  When the 
body becomes the “self,” it not only occupies space, it also 
occupies time. To occupy time is to have a past, present and 
future. Then the past of the body is its birth, the future is 
its death, and the present is its aging. This fact brings about 
grief, lamentation, pain, sorrow, and exhaustion. Thus arises 
the entire mass of suffering.
The recognition of this is the recognition of the origin 
of suffering. Reflecting on this is the way to end suffering. 
Constant reflecting on this sequence of events gradually 
leads to the ending of all suffering.
(7)  This can also be done by first broadening the 
normal narrow mind. This is to think: “I am not 
the only one that suffers in this world. There are 
many that suffer in the world, some suffer even 
more than me. Therefore, may all beings, wherever 
they may be, be well, comfortable, peaceful, and 
happy.” Then begin to consider that others are as 
important as ourselves, and begin to wish them all 
good, and practice patience, tolerance, kindness 
71
and interest in the welfare of all beings without 
making a distinction between ourself and others, 
just as a mother thinks of her own children (Brahma 
vihara).
 Learning to calm the affective citta (id) is called 
tranquillity meditation (samatha bhavana). 
Learning to change the way of thinking of 
the cognitive mano (ego) is called insight 
meditation (vipassana bhavana). As we progress 
in our emotional control and purification of 
mind we begin to practice the fourfold exercise 
(sammappadhana): 
(1) Guarding the senses in the present (samvara)
(2)  Eliminating worries about the past and future 
(pahana)
(3)  Cultivating introspective awareness of the 
body and mind (bhavana)
(4)  Constant introspection throughout day and 
night (anurakkhana). 
When this method is practiced properly and regularly 
the mind does enter a state of special tranquillity, which 
is called Ecstasy (jhāna). Ecstasy means standing out (ec = 
out; stasy = stand), which is to stand out of all the common 
emotional experiences available in the world that we normally 
live in. It is a perfect tranquillity of mind contrary to what we 
normally experience in the world. This special tranquillity is 
what is called equilibrium (samādhi). It is not concentration 
as commonly described, but a tranquil stability of mind.
72
With the development of this wonderful tranquillity 
that one has never experienced before, the mind begins 
to go through a process of mental revolution, which is a 
paradigm shift, from the experience of subjective and 
objective existence to an experience of an impersonal 
experience where one awakens from the dream of existence. 
With this Awakening comes an awareness of a Supernormal 
Metaphysical Reality (pariññā),6 which transcends the 
normal existential experience of a “self” that exists in a 
“world” that exists. This is an emancipation of mind that 
can never be disturbed called the imperturbable serenity 
(akuppa ceto vimutti), which is the well-known NIRV ANA. 
Normally, people stand on concepts taking them to be 
reality. People basically stand on the concept of existence, 
taking it to be real. When one has seen that the subject and 
object are only mental constructs, the reality of existence 
ceases. It is the cessation of both subject and object through 
insight. One begins to see that existence is only a mental 
construct, created through the process of perception and 
conception. In other words, existence is only an experience. 
Experience is the basis of existence. This means experience 
precedes existence, and existence is a product of experience. 
When one realizes this, one stops standing on existence,  
and begins to stand on the experience, which is the basis of 
existence. This is “under-standing” (paññā). 
In other words, this is “awakening” from the “dream 
of existence” into an extraordinary or transcendent reality 
6 This is a special translation of the word pariññā, which is extremely meaningful.
73
(pariññā), though not a transcendental or Metaphysical 
Reality. 
As one’s awareness of the reaction develops to a high 
level, and one begins to become aware of the perceptual 
process; when one begins to see that there is no real person 
thinking or doing anything here; when even the reality of the 
object perceived ceases to be real, then there is only a process 
of activity  going on due to the presence of the necessary 
conditions. When the conditions cease, the activity ceases. 
With this realization, the “sense of self” disappears, and 
then the emotional reaction has no meaning. Therefore, 
this realization stops all emotional reactions and maintains 
the perfect calmness and tranquillity which is called 
NIRV ANA, the imperturbable serenity of mind.
At this level a person has transcended the normal 
human level and has reached a supernormal level.  This 
supernormal level is only a tranquillity of the citta and a 
transformation of the cognitive  mano, which is called 
“awakening from the dream of existence,” which may also 
be described as “experiencing an impersonal experience.” 
This means, one does not personalize the experience 
thinking, “this experience is mine,” or “I am experiencing,” 
nor does one identify the body as, “this is me” or “this is my 
self.” Of course, a normal person could mistake this to be an 
abnormality, or even insanity, but it is a supernormal state 
that is free from all suffering, even death.
74
Transcendence Through Evolution
This awakening from the dream of existence is 
a transcendence of the normal consciousness to a 
supernormal level, which is extremely rare in the world. It 
is seen as an evolutionary level of the human consciousness. 
The human consciousness, obviously, must evolve to a 
higher level someday. The normal human being is not at 
the highest evolutionary level. This is why there is so much 
crime, war and mental sickness prevalent in the world today. 
The Buddhists believed that individuals do evolve beyond 
this level from time to time, and it had occurred in the 
past. Buddhists believe that the teaching of the Buddha is 
a description of the path of evolution of the human being. 
They also believe that the Buddha represents that fully 
evolved state, and his perfected disciples were also fully 
evolved individuals. They were those who had transcended 
the normal consciousness. 
Buddhists also believe that it is this transcendence that 
all religions describe as union with God. Buddhists call 
it awakening from the dream of existence. The normal 
consciousness is aware of a “self that exists” in a “world 
that exists.” The Supernormal Consciousness is aware 
of the mental process of perception and conception that 
creates this “world” and the “self.” By becoming aware of 
the process of perception and conception, the reality of the 
“world” and the “self” is lost. This is the awakening from 
the dream of existence. Just as a magician looking at a 
magic show sees no magic in it, the one who has awakened 
from the dream of existence sees that nothing really exists, 
either subjective or objective. This is not a fact unknown 
75
to modern psychologists and philosophers, but they do not 
normally take it seriously into their everyday life, because 
the normal human being, although quite rational, is 
dominated by emotions, which are blind. 
This transcendence of the normal human consciousness 
can be viewed as the culmination of the evolutionary 
process, spoken of by Charles Darwin. He pointed out that 
evolution takes place because of a “struggle for existence.” 
He spoke of a “survival of the fittest,” but in reality, no 
individual survived, only the species continued through 
reproduction. Every molecule that was formed had to break 
down, because it was dependent on necessary conditions. 
What is dependent on conditions is unstable. It was the 
energy released by this breaking down that was used to build 
new ones. So, the struggle continues but no individual 
survives. 
This means, only a struggle to exist continues but no 
individual continues to exist. In other words, this struggle 
is a failure. The continuity of this futile struggle is only a 
continuity of suffering. Every atom, every molecule, every 
thought and every emotion is in a continuous process of 
coming and going. Existence is a static concept, but life is 
a dynamic process of change, like the water in a river that 
is changing all the time. It is not the same river that one sees 
the next moment. This is why Heraclitus  of Ephesus said: 
“one cannot enter the same river twice.” In a similar way, 
the baby that is born is not the girl or boy that gets married; 
similarly the old person that dies is not the girl or boy who 
got married. 
76
A person or individual is not a static entity but a 
dynamic process of change like a wave in the ocean. 
Does a wave really exist? Does a changing process really 
exist? Is it only when the change is found to be slow that 
we tend to form the static concept – existence? If so, do 
we, you and I, really exist? “Existence is an illusion,” or 
more appropriately a “delusion.” If we can accept this, we 
will be immortal, because if we do not exist, how can we 
grow old or die? “Immortality” is “not a being,” but an 
“absence.” Therefore, immortality is not eternal life.  It 
is freedom from the “delusion of existence.” This is the 
immortality shown by the Buddha, which can be gained 
through the evolution of consciousness. When the human 
consciousness has evolved, to the level where this truth has 
been fully comprehended, but in the absence of interfering 
blind emotions, the struggle for existence stops. This is 
why Buddhist meditation is of two types: first is freeing 
the mind of emotions (samatha), and then in developing 
the thinking faculty to realize absence (suññathā). This is 
insight (vipassanā). 
This process called life, which started as an unusual 
self-replicating molecule that was able to absorb atoms from 
its surroundings and create molecules of its own kind, made 
a terrible mistake quite unconsciously. When, through the 
evolutionary process, the human animal became conscious, 
and able to think rationally, unhindered by emotions, he 
became aware of the mistake of struggling to exist. He 
realized that it was only a struggle to become permanent in 
an impermanent world. It was a futile struggle where only 
disappointment and frustration persisted. Becoming aware 
77
of this fact, the wise human animal stops the futile struggle, 
and thereby stops not only the process of evolution itself, 
but also all sufferings connected with illusory existence.
The Humanistic Saviour 
This is why the Buddhist does not think, “the saviour 
of the world is the Creator of the world.” The Creator 
cannot be a saviour because he is the Creator of suffering. 
The true saviour can only be a human being who can 
free themself from this suffering by transcending the 
normal human consciousness,  of an existing self, which 
is dreaming of a “self” that exists in a world that does not 
allow existence.” This saviour awakens from this “dream 
of existence,” and then teaches others to awaken from this 
terrible nightmare, “the dream of life and death.” The all-
knowing, all-powerful, all-good “God” is not an unknown 
Creator, but a known human being who transcends all 
human weaknesses. Such an individual is the Buddha, and 
he is therefore the true God of the Buddhists. He is therefore 
called “God-become” (brahma bhuto). 
This description of the Buddha helps one understand 
that Buddhism is neither theistic nor atheistic. It is 
humanistic because this concept of God is a humanistic 
concept of God. It recognises the potential divinity of the 
human being. It is through the process of evolution that 
the human being evolves to the level of God. This is not 
a deification of a human being, but the description of the 
gradual evolution of the human being, and thus transcending 
all human weaknesses, to reach a super-human divine 
78
state of perfection.  This is the humanistic way of union 
with God, which all religions speak of in their own way. God 
is understood in Buddhist thinking, to be only the human 
ideal of perfection. God is the ideal of perfection  that 
human beings conceive, and struggle to realize through the 
practice of religion. When a human being does realize this 
ideal, they are called an Awake One, a Buddha. When this 
occurs, the process of evolution stops, because the futile 
struggle to exist stops, and one has “awakened” from the 
“dream of existence.”  The essence of this “God” is not 
“existence,” as in the case of the theistic God; the essence 
of this God is “non-existence.” This God has ceased to 
exist, even when others see him as a living existing person. 
Buddha is the anthropomorphic God of the Buddhist, or 
rather the Theo-psychic Man.
Tranquillity
The Indian yogis even before the Buddha knew the 
method of entering a very high level of tranquillity of the 
mind through meditation. There were eight deep levels  of 
tranquillity that the yogis had reached during the time of 
the Buddha. The Buddha went only one step further and 
temporarily stopped all activities of the mind by entering 
a state of quiescence  which was similar to hibernation. 
This state was called sañña vedayita nirodha, which means, 
“cessation of sensation and feeling.”  It was when the 
Buddha rose from this state of quiescence by recovering 
consciousness that he “awakened from the dream of 
existence.” He awoke from the dream of existence  by 
79
observing the sequence of antecedents (paticca samuppada) 
that create the world and the self.
These levels of deep tranquillity were practiced, 
in order to rest the mind temporarily, not to remain in 
them permanently. This temporary tranquillity was not 
Nirvana. It was only a means to Nirvana. Nirvana is 
a state of mental quietus that could never be disturbed 
under any circumstance, even in the face of death. It is a 
state of tranquillity that lasts throughout normal life. This 
imperturbable serenity of mind is gained by awakening 
from the dream of existence and death. It is immortality 
through freedom from the “delusion of existence.” It is a 
lasting emancipation from all suffering.
In order to achieve this, supernormal and extremely 
high level of evolution called Nirvana, which is extremely 
rare in the world both ancient and modern, one has to give 
up the experience of existence of a “self” in the world. We 
are normally attempting to preserve a “self” that does not 
“exist.” The “self” is a delusion. It is the “self-consciousness” 
that stands as an obstacle to imperturbability. This “self-
consciousness” becomes a problem even when we try to 
control our impulses, because we tend to identify with our 
emotions and personalize them, and thereby become unable 
to let-go of what we think is a part of ourself. It is only when 
one is able to “awaken from the dream of existence” that the 
self-consciousness disappears. 
This was the special attainment of the Buddha, by which 
he went beyond the other yogis. He did this by attaining to 
the ending of all mental activity and returning again to the 
80
normal state. In doing so, he saw how the mind created the 
“world” and the “self” in it. He also saw how the “self” gets 
involved with the “world” in emotional relationships, and 
what all the painful experiences result in, including meeting 
the unpleasant, parting from the pleasant, frustration, aging, 
disease, death, and the grief, lamentation, pain, depression, 
and exhaustion that follows. This attainment is rising above 
the normal to the supernormal state, which is freedom from 
all suffering. 
This Supernormal State, however, is not what we are 
aiming at in this paper; it was mentioned only to indicate 
what the teaching of the Buddha aims at, ultimately. 
81
SECTION TWO
The Self
Western philosophers, throughout the history of 
Western philosophy, have been “self” oriented in their 
thinking. It was Descartes who made the categorical 
statement “I think, therefore I am” (cogito ergo sum). The 
existentialist philosophers assumed the “existence” of the 
“self,” even when they seemed to deny it. Even Sigmund 
Freud, who saw the personality as an energy system, used 
the term ego to refer to the rational part of the mind. His later 
followers became more interested in the ego as a reality, and 
changed their focus from a concern with the conflict between 
the id and the ego, and began to focus on what they saw as 
the more realistic relation between the ego and its object. 
Therefore, Modern Western psychotherapy is often seen as 
a way of strengthening the “ego.” It was Alfred Adler, who 
was an early associate of Freud, who first pointed in that 
direction.
The Problem Of Self-Esteem
Mathew McKay and Patrick Fanning, in their book 
Self Esteem, wrote: “One of the main factors differentiating 
humans from other animals is the awareness of self: the 
ability to form an identity and then attach a value to it.” 
“In other words,” they continue, “you have the capacity to 
define who you are and then decide if you like that identity 
or not. The problem of self-esteem is this human capacity for 
judgement. It’s one thing to dislike certain colours, noises, 
shapes, or sensations. But when you reject parts of yourself, 
82
you greatly damage the psychological structures that literally 
keep you alive.
“Judging and rejecting yourself causes enormous pain. 
And in the same way that you would favour and protect a 
physical wound, you find yourself avoiding anything that 
might aggravate the pain of self-rejection in any way. You 
take fewer social, academic, or career risks. You make it more 
difficult for yourself to meet people, interview for a job, or 
push hard for something where you might not succeed. You 
limit your ability to open yourself with others, express your 
sexuality, be the centre of attention, hear criticism, ask for 
help, or solve problems. To avoid more judgements and self-
rejection, you erect barriers of defence. Perhaps you blame 
and get angry, or bury yourself in perfectionist work. Or you 
brag. Or you make excuses. Sometimes you turn to alcohol 
or drugs.”
 McKay and Fanning also point out that hundreds of 
researchers have been working on this problem, trying to 
discover the causes of self-esteem and ways of developing it. 
From what these two authors say, it is quite clear that modern 
psychologists have begun to see that the psychological 
problem is the lack of “self-esteem,” and therefore they 
have made “self-esteem” their main focus of attention. They 
have begun to think that the solution to the problem is to find 
ways of developing self-esteem. 
Bernie Zilbergeld,  in his book, The Shrinking of 
America, points out that although psychotherapy in general 
has only limited effectiveness, his studies led him to believe 
that psychotherapy does positively affect self-esteem. 
83
Improved self-esteem “may be counselling’s most important 
outcome.” In other words, what modern psychotherapy 
has been able to positively achieve so far is only the 
improvement of self-esteem. This might, in the future too, 
become the main goal of psychotherapy.
Inferiority Complex
Alfred Adler, one of the pioneers of modern 
psychotherapy, pointed out that the inferiority feeling is 
at the root of all psychological problems. This inferiority 
feeling develops in early childhood because children are 
naturally weaker than adults. In addition, the growing child 
is bound to meet children who are better than them in certain 
ways. Therefore, no one escapes feelings of inferiority 
and envy. All children want to be in the limelight, be the 
centre of attention, and be accepted. Inferiority means that 
one is not accepted, one is not in the limelight. Inferiority 
feelings cause children to feel that they are not fit to be in the 
limelight, and that, if they were thrown into the limelight, 
people would discover their inferiority or unfitness and 
reject them. Of course, they are only rejecting themselves by 
judging themselves in this way. Yet, not realising this, they 
shy away from public attention. They begin to shiver when 
attention is focused on them. This inferiority feeling, when 
carried into adult life, prevents people from getting ahead in 
life. This could also lead to any or all of the many varieties 
of psychological problems mentioned above. Thus no one 
escapes from psychological problems; it is normal to have 
them - it is supernormal to be free of them.
84
People compensate for these inferiority feelings in 
various ways. One might compensate by trying to achieve 
greatness in some way or other, good or bad, social or 
antisocial. One might become a philanthropist, a criminal or a 
neurotic according to how one compensates. This is also how 
character is developed, whether good or bad. Withdrawal into 
neurosis or functional psychosis is an attempt to compensate 
in an unrealistic way. This unrealistic compensation can also 
lead to perversions, alcoholism, drug addiction, and even 
suicide. This is also what makes people turn to crime and 
war. Good as well as bad can come out of inferiority feelings, 
depending on how one chooses to deal with them. And no 
one can escape inferiority feelings.
Buddha’s Idea Of Personalization
More than twenty-five centuries ago it was Siddhatta 
Gotama, the Buddha (the Awakened One), who discovered 
a different way of understanding and solving this same 
problem of low self-esteem or inferiority complex. He called 
this problem “dukkha,” which means, “pain,” or discomfort 
both physical and mental. He saw this as the “discomfort 
of being,” (bhava dukkha). The word “being” here refers to 
“being a self.” In other words, this “self-consciousness” or 
consciousness of being a “self” or having a “personality,” is 
the problem. We tend to personalize and identify ourselves 
not only with our body and mind, but also with things outside 
the body, such as our family, our culture, our nation, our job, 
our financial and social status, our educational qualifications, 
our achievements, and all such internal and external material 
and spiritual things that people normally identify with. 
85
This identification is also called “personalization” 
(upadana) in Buddhism. It is through personalization 
that we acquire a “personal identity,” or “personality.” To 
“personalize” is to think and feel, “this is mine.” One tends 
to personalize the body by thinking, “this body is mine.” 
The body becomes a personal property. In the same way 
one personalizes sensations that arise and pass away in the 
body. One similarly personalizes perceptions, conceptions, 
emotions, actions, and consciousness itself, as “mine.” One 
personalizes, not only the body and the mental processes 
that continue inside the body; one even personalizes external 
objects, like one’s family members, one’s ancestry, one’s 
social status, one’s job, one’s income, one’s house, one’s car, 
one’s bank account, and many more such things. The sum 
total of all that has been personalized becomes one’s “self.” 
What has been personalized is what one identifies with, and 
is called “mine” or “myself.” Then one’s “identity” becomes 
what one identifies with or personalizes. 
In other words, the Buddha saw that personality is only 
a concept, a perspective, which results from personalization 
of perceived objects such as the body and the mind. It is 
accompanied by a mental image of how one sees oneself, and 
is therefore called the “self-image.” Having “personalized” 
things and having thus created a “self-image,” or personality 
perspective (sakkāyaditthi), one then begins to compare these 
“personalized objects” (upadhi) with those of others. In other 
words, having identified one’s “self” this way, one begins to 
compare oneself with other selves (māna). Not only does one 
compare one’s body or mind with that of another, one even 
compares one’s social or economic status, one’s house, one’s 
86
car or any other personalized property. By comparing this 
way, one begins to feel inferior (hīna māna), superior (seyya 
māna) or equal (sadisi mana). This is how the problem of 
self-esteem begins. 
Personalization results in a personality which is seen  
as one’s “self,” and this self-consciousness leads to 
comparison with other such selves, resulting in the low 
“self-esteem,” “inferiority complex,” and the whole host of 
psychological problems described above. They are all the 
consequence of personalization and the formation of the 
notion of “self.” The painful experiences recounted above 
are all the result of this personalization. It may be true that 
out of all the animals in the world, the human being is the 
only animal that is aware of a “self.” This does not, however, 
mean that this “self-consciousness” has to be preserved 
despite its painful consequences.
Personality Perspective
As mentioned above, the Buddha saw this “personal 
identity” as a psychopathological burden that we carry 
throughout life. This “personality perspective” (sakkāya 
ditthi) was seen to be pathological and unhealthy because 
it is productive of pain and suffering to oneself as well as to 
others. It is this “personality perspective” that is responsible 
for the “identity crisis” described by Erik Erikson. This 
“identity crisis” is the inability to decide what one should 
identify with. “Uncertainties” like “Who am I now?” “Who 
was I in the past?” and “What will I be in the future” can 
arise only if one is conscious of a “self.” This “uncertainty” 
87
is also the inability to decide whether to take sides with 
our personalised emotional impulses (āsava) and become 
pleasure seekers (kāmasukhallikānuyōga), or to take sides 
with our personalised conscience (hiri ottappa) and become 
ascetics (attakilamatānuyōga). This is what Leon Festinger 
called cognitive dissonance, which the Buddha called 
vicikiccā. But asceticism is not better than pleasure seeking. 
The Buddha saw that asceticism is based on mere suppressive, 
self-denying vows (sīlabbata) that split the personality and 
create conflict within. The person who is free from the 
“personality perspective” is free from uncertainty and self-
denying vows. Such individuals are able to successfully 
eliminate an emotional impulse, because they do not give 
it power by personalising it. They do not see the impulse as 
a part of themselves, and therefore can easily let it go. This 
brings about a cognitive consonance.
The solution to the problem of self-esteem, which the 
Buddha offers, is simple. It is to attack the problem at its root. It 
is to give up personalising and the measuring. In other words, 
we have to depersonalise what has been personalised. This 
is something that people generally hesitate to do. They hate 
to lose their “self” however unpleasant it may be. To lose the 
“self,” they feel, is to lose ‘their very “being” or “existence.” 
They do not realize that their notions of “self,” “being,” 
“existence,” and “identity” are only pathological concepts, 
which they have acquired through the personalization of 
perceived objects. Because we do not generally meet people 
who have consciously rooted out their “self-identity” we 
think it is abnormal to be without such a “self-identity.” The 
absence of a “self-identity,” does not reify a person or turn a 
88
person into a “thing,” such as a robot. It only turns a selfish, 
frightened, defensive, and unhappy person into an unselfish, 
fearless, cooperative, kind, and happy one. It leads a self-
centred person to become interested in the welfare of others, 
to see that another’s pain is as important as one’s own. Such 
a selfless individual does not make a distinction between 
themself and others, because to do so is not only to be egoistic 
and self-centred, but also to be egotistic and selfish.
In Buddhism this conscious removal of the “self-
identity” is regarded as a hallowed, extraordinary, 
“supernormal” (ariya) condition, which is a superior state of 
mental health. Because this is not the ordinary human state, it 
is also seen as a “superhuman” (uttarīmanussa), transcendent 
(lōkuttara), and divine (brahma) state. This absence of the 
notion of “self” is not merely a peculiar Buddhist concept; 
even Jesus seems to refer to it in the Christian gospels: “He 
who loses his self for my sake shall find it” (Mat. 10:39). 
This concept is also found in Hinduism where enlightenment 
is seen as the loss of the “individual self” when it merges 
with the “Universal Self” of God (Brahma). This is also the 
common mystical experience of “at-one-ment” in all theistic 
religions, where the soul unites with God. If the individual 
soul unites with the universal soul of God, the individual 
soul cannot remain separate, just as when a river enters the 
ocean, it cannot remain as a separate entity.
Depersonalization Disorder
Although, according to ancient religious thinking, 
depersonalisation is seen as a healthy activity that 
89
transforms a person from a normal to a supernormal state, 
I am aware that this idea is seen in modern psychiatry as 
a pathological condition. According to the Dictionary of 
Psychology by Arthur S. Reber (Penguin Books), this term 
“depersonalisation” represents an emotional disorder in 
which there is loss of contact with one’s personal reality, a de-
realization accompanied by feelings of strangeness and an 
unreality of experience. In severe cases, parts of one’s body 
feel alien or altered in size and one may have the experience 
of perceiving oneself from a distance. This condition is 
called depersonalization disorder or depersonalization 
neurosis. The conscious depersonalisation of personality by 
the Buddhist can easily be confused with the pathological 
condition mentioned above, although it is quite distinct from 
the pathological condition in several ways.
This confusion seems to arise due to a staunch belief of 
the neo-Freudians, in a personal ego. It was Paul Schilder 
(1886-1940) and Paul Federn (1872 - 1950), both Freudians 
who described the ego as the “omnipresent component of 
consciousness.” Paul Schilder identified the ego not only 
as the “thinker” as Descartes did, but also as the feeler, 
perceiver and actor. “The ego thinks, feels, perceives, has 
a past and present… every experience presupposes an ego.” 
(Schlder, P . Medical Psychology, pp 290-300, 1953). Paul 
Federn spoke of a “sense of ego” not as something that is 
perceived specifically but as something that one is generally 
aware of continuously. Edoardo Weis writing about Federn 
says, “The sense of ego which is omnipresent, is not ordinarily 
recognized. Yet, variations in intensity of ego feeling are a 
matter of common experience. When tired or drowsy, we 
90
feel numb; upon waking from a refreshing sleep, or upon 
receiving exciting news, we feel an invigorated “sense of 
ego”. Federn spoke of an “ego cathexis.” This fluctuation of 
the “sense of ego” was explained by means of his theory of 
“libido cathexis,” or emotional investment. What it means is 
that if the ego becomes emotionally interested in an object, 
there is the experience of the “sense of ego.” When the 
ego withdraws its interest, the object appears strange. The 
feeling of depersonalisation, which is described as the “loss 
of the sense of reality of one’s self,” is understood to be a 
similar estrangement, similar to inadequate investment of 
libido either in the body or in the mind, and can be caused by 
different emotional reasons.” 
We do concede that there can be pathological cases 
of depersonalisation resulting from what the Buddha called 
“the urge to get rid of existence” (vibhava tanha), which is 
based on a dislike for what exists. These pathological cases 
of depersonalisation are in fact “unconscious” processes. 
What we are referring to here is a “conscious” process of 
depersonalisation based on a full awareness of reality. This 
conscious depersonalisation is something practiced not only 
in Buddhism, but also in other religions like Hinduism and 
even in Christianity as mentioned before. There is, however, 
a difference in the degree of depersonalisation in the different 
religions. In Hinduism and Christianity, there is always a 
subtle “self” that remains, which is called “soul” or “atman.” 
But in Buddhism, there is a radical depersonalisation where 
nothing remains to identify as a “self.”
It is interesting to notice, however, that the pathological 
case of depersonalising as described by Federn involves 
91
the withdrawal of libido cathexis from the object, though 
unconsciously done by the patient. The Buddhist practice 
of conscious depersonalisation is quite similar to the above 
in that it could be seen as a withdrawal of libido cathexis, 
but this is done consciously. Further, this pathological 
depersonalisation is not a complete depersonalisation. It 
is a partial depersonalisation where the ego remains as the 
subject while the object alone is depersonalised. Edoardo 
Weiss says on this subject, “The ego may react to an external 
situation presenting a conflict, by withdrawing itself from 
the sense organs, thus causing the outer world to be unreal; it 
may withdraw itself similarly from a body organ, which has 
become the source of unpleasant sensations, or from some 
objectionable wish or affect.” (Weir, E. The Principles of 
Psychodynamics. NY . Grune and Stratton, 1950).
Complete Depersonalization
It is clear that this unconscious partial depersonalization 
is the reason for the complaint and the suffering in the 
pathological condition, as Reber described in his Dictionary 
of Psychology, “feelings of strangeness and unreality of 
experience. In severe cases, parts of one’s body feel alien 
or altered in size and one may have the experience of 
perceiving oneself from a distance.” (The Bolds are mine, 
in order to draw attention to the personalized subject, and 
the depersonalized object). Complete depersonalization 
consciously executed results in freedom from worry and 
fear because such depersonalization frees one from the 
“notion of self,” which is responsible for all worries and 
fears. The self-centred mind is always unhappy while the 
92
selfless mind is always happy. It is because people prefer 
to hold on to the “personality perspective” rather than let it 
go, that they continue to suffer from personality disorders. 
The few individuals who learn to consciously let go of the 
“self-consciousness” gain freedom from mental sickness and 
suffering. 
Although letting go of the “self-identity” sounds like an 
impossible or at least a very difficult task, it can be achieved. 
The Buddha did it, and so did all his enlightened disciples. 
It is what all Buddhists attempt to do in their practice. It 
involves a sacrifice of what one cherishes most, the feeling of 
“being.” The people who feel their “self” crushed or rejected 
are the people who mostly hesitate to let go; they hang on 
to their “self” and are very defensive. Yet their freedom lies 
only in letting go of this false “self.” This “self” has to be 
seen as a burden that we are carrying all the time. Freedom is 
found by letting go of the burden. In Buddhism, this letting 
go of the “self” is called “laying down the burden.” Probably 
this was what Jesus meant when he said, “Come unto me 
those who are heavy laden, and I shall give you rest.”
The Buddha not only saw that this “self-identity” has 
to be eradicated from our thoughts, feelings and behaviour, 
but he also discovered the technique of doing so. This 
technique is what he taught as the Supernormal Eight-fold 
Way (ariya atthangika magga), the eight constituents (1. 
Harmonious perspective, 2. Harmonious orientation, 3. 
Harmonious speech, 4. Harmonious action, 5. Harmonious 
life style, 6. Harmonious practice, 7. Harmonious attention, 
8. Harmonious equilibrium.)
93
This technique begins with the Harmonious Perspective, 
which is a perspective free of self-centred or selfish thinking, 
where self-consciousness disappears because it is not 
supported by self-centred emotions. Such a mind is calm 
and tranquil, free of conflict both internal and external. It 
is also a kind and compassionate, way of thinking of “all,” 
just as a mother thinks of her children, instead of thinking 
of a separate “I” and “you.” This is a paradigm shift from 
diversity to unity, within a person, which brings about peace 
and harmony within and without. 
The Harmonious Perspective
This Harmonious Perspective results from an 
understanding of the fundamental problem of existence, 
and its solution. Before we can find a solution, the cause 
of the problem should be understood. The solution then is 
the removal of the cause, but a method has to be adopted 
to remove the cause. The Buddha, as did Freud, was aware 
that the problem we are faced with is a conflict between our 
self-centred blind emotions (id) and reality  perceived by 
the rational (ego). The conflict has two parts: the inner and 
the outer. The outer conflict is the familiar conflict between 
our emotions and the reality of impermanence  around us; 
for example, the impermanence of life itself, ending in death, 
or the mere change in our pleasant relationships in parting 
from our loved ones, or meeting the unavoidable devastating 
effects of a tornado, an earthquake, or even of war. The inner 
conflict is the conflict between our blind emotions and our 
reason, which is aware of the impermanent reality around us. 
94
It is a conflict between two parts of our own mind, emotion 
and reason. 
When emotion and reason are in conflict, emotion 
always tends to win. Emotion is powerful but blind. Reason 
is weak though intelligent. Yet intelligence can be more 
successful than brute power. It is true that emotions have 
helped the lower animals to some extent, in defending 
themselves from danger, and in the continuation of their 
species, although it is not the best defence, for we see its 
failure when we see a lion chasing the deer. The human 
beings, however, have a better tool for this purpose. This 
tool is what distinguishes the human being from all other 
animals. It is the human intelligence, which has helped 
humankind throughout history to tide through the troubles 
and tribulations of life, despite its imperfections. The 
imperfection in the intelligence, when seriously considered, 
appears to be the result of blind emotions interfering with 
proper thinking.
Emotions have been for mankind a nagging vestige (like 
the appendix) carried forward from an earlier evolutionary 
stage, which has to be removed or kept under the control 
of the later developed but more effective intelligence. It is 
when emotion plays a dominant role that all psychopathic 
problems arise.
In seeking the way to gain control over emotions, it 
is important to understand that the human mind is not an 
entity separate from the body. It is the subjective experience 
of the objective activity of the body. It is the result of the 
activity of the nervous system. What we commonly call the 
95
mind is mainly two parts of this activity: the cognitive and 
the affective, which is subjectively experienced as reason 
and emotion, which often come in conflict and create our 
problems. 
The immature child or adult is dominated by emotion 
to a great extent, whereas the mature adult is mostly 
dominated by reason. Psychotherapy is an effort to make 
an immature person become mature. The reality of the 
immature person is influenced by emotion, and is quite 
different from that of the mature one. The mature mind 
can think more clearly, and therefore it is less hindered 
by emotions. The harmonious perspective  is therefore a 
mature perspective. The modern cognitive psychologists 
are becoming aware of the importance of developing the 
cognitive process. They have understood that the cognitive 
process can control the affective process. It is the cognitive 
process that is responsible for the bad behaviour of the 
affective process. 
This is why cognitive therapy deals with the cognitive 
process in order to correct the affective activity. In other 
words the emotions are corrected by correcting the rational 
faculty. This is why the Buddha started with the Harmonious 
Perspective. This was why even Sigmund Freud pointed 
out: “where the id is, there should be the ego.” This means: 
instead of the id, the ego should dominate one’s life.
Both the Buddha as well as Freud saw that emotions or 
the affective process comes in conflict with reality and also 
reason. Freud spoke of the id coming in conflict with the 
ego, while the Buddha spoke of the citta  coming in conflict 
96
with mano and reality. Reason is aware of the reality around, 
and therefore wants to be in tune with reality, while the 
blind emotions seek immediate gratification. This is why 
the child and the neurotic, who are dominated mainly by 
emotions, act emotionally rather than rationally.
The Buddha saw a solution to this conflict not through 
suppression, repression, or sublimation. His method was to 
understand that emotion is a physical disturbance in the body 
created by the thinking of cognitive  mano. If we learn to 
correct our thinking, the body becomes free from emotional 
disturbances. Such a body is relaxed where the mood (citta) 
is calm and tranquil. This tranquil mind is the healthy and 
happy mind. Such a mind is neither normal nor abnormal. 
It is supernormal because such perfect tranquillity is not a 
normal phenomenon. 
 The aim of the Buddha was a Perfect Imperturbability 
Of Mind at all times. The tranquil mind is free of self-centred 
emotions. Therefore, it is not only dominated by reason, 
it is also free of selfishness or even the “sense of self.” 
Tranquillity depersonalizes the personality. It is only when 
this depersonalization has been perfected cognitively by 
mano that the tranquillity will remain. Otherwise, the mind 
can get disturbed again and the tranquillity is lost. Therefore, 
while in the tranquil state, the depersonalization must be 
consciously perfected by changing the way we think. It 
then becomes a cognitive transformation, which we call a 
paradigm shift from existential thinking to experiential 
thinking. We may not be able to attain to that ideal state 
immediately, but every step taken in that direction through 
the Supernormal Eightfold Way brings one to a greater 
97
level of happiness, the problem being solved gradually 
to a greater and greater degree. In other words, the solution 
grows in degrees.
Levels Of Presentation
Harmonious perspective, in short, is becoming 
aware of the problem and its solution. It is in making this 
paradigm shift that the therapist can help. The rest is the 
work of the patient, which often follows automatically. 
The therapist acts as a teacher rather than a doctor, and 
the patient becomes a student. The Buddha presented 
the problem and its solution, in the form of the Fourfold 
Supernormal Reality. 
1. The problem –   Conflict between emotions and 
reality
2. The cause  –  The blind emotions 
3. The solution –  Elimination of blind emotions
4. The method  –  The Supernormal Eightfold Way
This reality is supernormal because it is not the reality 
of the normal or the abnormal person. It is a reality that 
rises above the normal to a supernormal level, though it is 
quite accessible. Yet one has to gain access to it in degrees. 
Therefore, it has to be described in relation to four main 
levels of development as follows:
98
Levels Of Development
1. Knowledge –  Comprehending the Awake One and 
his teaching (saddhā)
2. Discipline – Discipling one’s behaviour (sīla)
3. Tranquillity – Tranquillizing the citta (samādhi)
4. Comprehending Reality –  Awakening from the 
dream of “self” and 
“existence” (paññā)
99
The Principle Of Determinism
The problem of determinism came to be known in 
the West only during the age of Enlightenment in the 18 th 
Century. This was when modern science began. Till then 
people believed that all occurrences of nature such as thunder, 
lightning, and earthquakes were caused by God the Creator 
of the world. Gradually the intelligentsia began to discover 
that these natural occurrences were dependent on conditions 
like electricity and magnetism. This was how the principle of 
determinism was discovered. 
Solving the problem of low self esteem
Having understood the Harmonious Perspective, it is 
possible to see how a problem such as “low self-esteem” can 
be solved through this technique. 
1.  The First Level Of Development 
At this level we begin to gain confidence that it can be 
done by understanding how the Buddha did it. When we have 
comprehended the way by understanding the teaching we 
begin to know how to overcome selfishness. We then begin 
to change our sense of values. Our aim now is not to build a 
“self,” but to get rid of the “notion of self” and even to help 
others who suffer. We notice how others suffer by seeking to 
build a “self.” Judgment of superiority or inferiority depends 
on their desire to build a “self.” For example, if I think that 
financial prosperity is of great value, I will begin to feel 
inferior when I meet a person who is richer than me. If I do 
100
not think so, I will not feel inferior. If I think that having a 
university degree is of great value, I will feel inferior when I 
meet someone who has a degree higher than mine. If I think 
that physical height is of great value, I will feel inferior when 
I meet a person taller than me. Our feeling of inferiority or 
low self-esteem depends on our sense of values and our 
desire to build a “self.” Therefore, the problem is solved at 
this level by changing our sense of values and the desire to 
build a “self.”
2.  The Second Level Of Development
At this level we begin to discipline our behaviour and 
broaden our mind. We begin to consider others as important 
as ourselves. Then we stop worrying about our superiority 
or inferiority. We realize that these feelings of inferiority are 
present in everyone, even in great kings and emperors. What 
is important is to help others overcome their problems, and 
be concerned about the welfare of all humanity, and even 
animals and plants. Such thoughts dissolve the feelings of 
low self-esteem. Our hearts become broad. Only narrow 
minds seek prominence and feel inferior.
3.  The Third Level Of Development 
At this level we appreciate the value of calmness. We 
learn to relax the body and calm the mind. We learn to calm 
the emotions instead of fighting, suppressing or repressing 
them. We learn that emotions are controlled by mental images. 
We can learn to change our mental images and maintain 
calming images in the mind. We walk calmly, work calmly, 
101
talk calmly, and think calming thoughts. We avoid emotional 
thoughts as far as we can. Even if we become emotional by 
accident, we know how to regain our composure and return 
to calmness quickly. This way, thoughts of inferiority never 
enter our minds. We are not concerned about inferiority or 
superiority at all.
4.  The Fourth Level Of Development
This is the level of impersonality. This is a very high 
level. It is at this level that we learn to depersonalize all that 
has been personalized as “mine.” By cultivating calmness of 
mind, we have seen how thoughts of “self” disappears when 
the mind is fully tranquil. We know that the self-consciousness 
is a result of tensions in the body and emotional excitement. 
We are fully convinced that there is no real “self” to talk 
about. We understand that the idea of “self” arises from 
personalization. Although we understand that there is no true 
“self,” yet feelings of “self” spring up by habit. So, we try to 
overcome the habit by constantly watching the mind for pop-
ups and dwelling on depersonalizing thoughts, as follows:
(1) There are only activities, no existing entities 
(2) Every activity is dependent on conditions 
(3) What is dependent is unstable 
(4) What is unstable is unpleasant
(5) What is unpleasant is not as I want 
(6) What is not as I want is not under my power
(7) What is not under my power cannot be “mine”
(8) What is not mine cannot be “me” or my “self.”
102
We begin to think in the same way, regarding every part 
of the personality. When we have been able to depersonalize 
the total personality, the thought “I am” does not arise as a 
real fact. When the thought “I am” is absent, how can there 
be the thought “I am inferior?” This is how the harmonious 
perspective can put an end to all troubles described above. Yet 
this depersonalization has to be done in degrees, according 
to different levels of progress.
When this Buddhist meditation, as taught by the Buddha, 
is practiced, one begins to see oneself as an impersonal 
process, which is really the modern scientific perspective, 
although this perspective does not play a dominant role in any 
scientist’s mind, in normal life. This unfortunate condition 
has been called, “cognitive dissonance.” This dissonance 
is because we are governed by emotional habits, just as the 
software governs a computer. Yet it is possible to overcome 
wrong emotional habits by consciously cultivating selective 
thinking. It has to be done through constant repetition of right 
thoughts in the mind. This means, this harmonious perspective 
has to be reflected upon day and night by constant repetition. 
This is the meaning of insight meditation in Buddhism.
This is how one depersonalizes what has been 
personalized. This depersonalization in thought (ditthi)  has 
to penetrate into one’s feelings (sankappa), and behaviour in 
the form of speech, (vaca) and action (kammanta) and one’s 
whole lifestyle (ajiva). This can happen only by constant 
practice (vayama), or repetition of this way of thinking. This 
means paying constant introverted attention (satipatthana) 
to one’s thoughts, feelings, speech, action, and life. When 
this is done, one regains one’s lost mental equilibrium 
103
(samadhi). When this equilibrium is successfully attained, 
followed by proper insight into the reality of impersonality, 
one gets disinterested (nibbindati) in one’s personality; being 
disinterested, one becomes dispassionate (virajjati); being 
dispassionate, one is freed from the “delusion of existence” 
as a “self” (vimuchchati). 
Regaining The Mental Equilibrium
Our problem is that we have lost our mental equilibrium, 
because of our reaction to the environmental stimulation 
of our senses. We not only react, we also personalize the 
reaction, thinking: “I react.” Then we begin to experience 
the instability of what has been personalized. Our mind is 
then shaken by the changing vicissitudes of life. If, on the 
other hand, we depersonalize what has been personalized, 
our mind is not shaken any more by whatever happens to 
the impersonal phenomena. Thus we regain our mental 
equilibrium. 
This “self-identity” or “notion of self” is indeed a 
tragedy because it carries with it all the miseries of life. We 
can turn our life into a joyful one by gaining freedom from this 
“delusion of self.” This makes Buddhism a very optimistic 
way of thought, though some writers have mistakenly called 
it pessimism. Freedom from “self” is not death; on the 
contrary, it is the freedom from death. When there is no 
“self” who is there to die? Obviously, this loss of “self” is 
the only way to perfect happiness, however fearful it may 
look. It is also the only true way to immortality, which all 
religions ultimately seek.
104
This is the Buddhist idea of awakening from the “dream 
of existence.” Of course, this process of depersonalization is 
not a sudden occurrence. It is a gradual process of growth 
and evolution. How long it takes depends on the individual’s 
level of maturity in terms of readiness to give up the pleasure 
principle and accept the reality of impersonality. According 
to the Buddha, an intelligent and serious meditator can reach 
perfection in a maximum of seven years. Some may take 
much longer. Yet some have done it in seven days, and very 
few overnight. The important point to realize, however, is 
that with every step one advances, there is a greater degree 
of happiness experienced.
This teaching of the Buddha is worthy of special 
study by modern psychologists. Such a study could end up 
in a major breakthrough in the field of psychotherapy. This 
means Buddhism is not a mere speculative philosophy, nor 
a dogmatic religion, nor even a materialistic science, but 
an evolutionary psychotherapy, where the human being 
transcends his animal weaknesses and reaches a supernormal 
superhuman transcendent state of perfection where all 
suffering comes to an end. 
The Buddha The Radical Shrink
It is interesting to note that modern psychiatrists 
and psychotherapists have been nicknamed “shrinks” by 
Americans, because they are being compared to the Native 
American medicine men of old. It is believed that the ancient 
medicine men could, by some method, shrink the heads 
of their enemies, after killing them, and preserve them as 
105
trophies. This “head shrinking,” however, can be given a more 
laudable interpretation in relation to Buddhist psychotherapy. 
A properly carried out psychotherapy, according to the 
Buddha, could be seen as a deflation of a person’s “ego,” 
which is “head shrinking.” The removal of the delusion 
of “self” can be seen as a deflation of the “ego” of a person. 
This Buddhist approach to psychotherapy is a 
deflation carried to its ultimate end. This form of therapy 
does not merely make abnormal people normal; it makes 
normal people “supernormal.” This means that Buddhist 
psychotherapy is a radical therapy, where the Buddha 
becomes the “Radical Shrink.”
THE END
106
Note :
107
THE 124 YEAR OLD BUDDHIST MAHA VIHARA, 
BRICKFIELDS
The Buddhist Maha Vihara was founded in 1894 by the Sasana 
Abhiwurdhi Wardhana Society (SAWS), the oldest registered 
Buddhist Society in the Klang Valley. 
From its very inception, the Vihara has been managed by the 
Sinhala Buddhist community but always financially supported 
by the Chinese and Indian communities. The first structure of 
the Vihara was the Main Shrine room, completed in the early 
20th Century. The donors for the Shrine Room, as recorded in the 
Selangor Government Gazette 1896, pg. 408 are clearly Chinese 
and Indian communities and among the main donors were: 
Kapitan Yeap Quang Seng, Towkay Loke Yew, K. Tambusamy Pillay, 
R. Doraisamy Pillay, Loke Chow Kit, San Peng and Son, Lim Tua 
Taw, etc… 
The Vihara was always the focal point to mobilize the Buddhist 
community. The large gathering to protest and stop the screening 
of the then controversial film “Light of Asia” in 1927 in Malaysia 
was also held at the Vihara, and so was the mass gathering and 
signature campaign in the 1950s to lobby the government to declare 
Wesak as a national holiday. 
During the Emergency period of 1948-1960, monks from the 
Vihara made a massive impact reaching out to calm and educate 
the psychologically disoriented Chinese New Villagers who were 
evicted from their traditional lands and placed in new settlements 
by the Government which was fighting a communist insurgency. 
Since the 1940s, the Vihara commenced a free Dhamma publications 
program as a Dhammadutta outreach to the masses which by the 
year 2012 was made available in 28 languages, with millions of 
108
copies of books and CDs produced. The Vihara’s Buddhist Institute 
Sunday Dhamma School (BISDS), founded in 1929, is the oldest 
Sunday School in the country with an enrolment of more than 1200 
students and continues to produce systematic books on Buddhist 
studies for children. 
The Wesak procession organized by the Vihara since the 1890s is 
the oldest and largest religious procession in the country. The 3-day 
Wesak celebrations at the Vihara attracts about 100,000 people.
Many students or devotees who have studied and benefited from 
the BISDS, the Vihara’s Free Publications, Dhamma programs, 
classes, talks, etc have gone on to set up new Buddhist societies 
and centers which help to spread Buddhism in the country far and 
wide. 
The SAWS is also one of the founding members of the Malaysian 
Consultative Council for Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, 
Sikhism and Taoism (MCCBCHST) formed in 1983, a Council 
which constructively engages the Government on matters affecting 
non-Muslims in the country. The MCCBCHST Administrative 
office is based at the Vihara. 
In 2004, the Vihara was a major focal point in the country to collect 
relief aid to assist the South Asian Tsunami that killed almost 
280,000 people. Several forty foot container equivalents of relief 
aid were dispatched by the Vihara to Sri Lanka, Indonesia, India, 
Myanmar and Thailand by air, sea and land. 
Buddhists remain the country’s largest organ donors, thanks to 
Cornea and Organ Donation Campaign carried out by the Vihara. 
The Vihara continues to operate to deliver its obligation to the 
Buddhist community till this day and is governed and directed by 
its Vision, 4 Missions, 6 Strategic Objectives and 4 Ennoblers in 
tribute and gratitude to all our past and current Sangha, volunteers, 
109
donors, friends, etc. We would be failing in our duty if we fail to 
mention the name of the foremost amongst them, our late Venerable 
Chief, ie. Ven Dr Kirinde Sri Dhammananda. 
Vision
To be a leading international center for the Learning, Practice and 
Dissemination of the Buddha Dhamma
Mission
To provide a conducive environment to:
 - promote scholarship and study of the Buddha Dhamma
 - propagate the Buddha Dhamma
 - be the focus of Buddhist activities for the larger community
 - foster Theravada Buddhist cultural and traditional practices
Six Strategic Objectives
To be the Buddhist center of choice for:
 1. Learning, Practising and the Realization of the Dhamma
 2. Spreading the Dhamma
 3. Buddhist Civilization
 4. Synergy groupings to sustain the Buddha Sasana
 5. Compassion in Action
 6. Financial Accountability while delivering Cultural Obligations
Four Ennoblers:
 1. Loving Kindness
 2. Compassion 
 3. Altruistic Joy
 4. Equanimity
Motto
Go forth, for the good, happiness and welfare of the many, out of 
compassion for the world.
110
SERVICES A V AILABLE AT
BUDDHIST MAHA VIHARA
• Dana for Monks (at Vihara or Home) and Bana (Sermons)
• Blessing Services / Funeral Services by Monks
• Booking of Facilities for religious functions / events
• Marriage Registration
• Full Moon / New Moon Day Puja & Free Vegetarian Lunch
• Sunday Dhamma Classes for Children & Adults
• Buddhist & Pali University Diploma, Degree & Masters Program
• K Sri Dhammananda Library
• Bookshop
DAILY ACTIVITIES
Monday to Sunday 6.30am - 7.30am Morning Buddha Puja
 11.30pm - 12.00 noon Noon Buddha Puja
 7.30pm - 8.30pm Evening Buddha Puja
WEEKLY ACTIVITIES
Mon, Wed, Thurs 8.00pm - 10.00pm Meditation Class
Tuesday 8.30pm - 10.00pm BMV Choir Practise
Thursday 7.30pm - 9.00pm Senior Club Yoga Practise
Friday 1.00pm - 2.00pm Afternoon Puja & Talk
 8.00pm - 9.30pm Dhamma Talk
Saturday 7.30pm - 8.30pm Bojjhanga Puja
 9.30am - 11.30am Sanskrit Class
Sunday 8.30am - 9.30am Morning Puja
 9.30am - 11.00am Abhidhamma Class
 9.30am - 12.00 noon Sunday School Session
 10.00am - 11.30am Dhamma Talk
 10.00am - 2.00pm Traditional Chinese Medicine
  (1st and 3rd Sun of the month. Please note there will be
  no clinic if a Public Holiday falls on the allocated Sunday)
 11.00am - 12.30pm Pali and Sutta Class
 1.30pm - 5.00pm Sinhala Language Classes
  Sinhala Cultural Dance Classes
 2.00pm - 3.00pm Dhamma for the Deaf (fortnightly)
 2.00pm - 7.00pm Diploma & Degree in Buddhism Classes
 5.00pm Feeding the Homeless
DONATION IN CASH OR KIND CAN BE MADE FOR:
• BISDS Building Fund -  Classrooms, Meditation Pavilion, Lifts, Meeting and Counseling rooms
• Free Publications (Malaysia and Overseas) - Annually about 300,000 books in 30 Languages
• Education Fund
• Full Moon and New Moon services sponsorship 
• General Maintenance of the Buddhist Maha Vihara
• Utilities (Electricity, water, telephone, administration etc)
• Illumination (lighting) of the Main Shrine Hall
• Illumination (lighting) of the Awkana Buddha & Cakra
• Monks' Dana -  Offering Monk Requisites of Food, Medicine, Lodging, Robes, etc
• Welfare Fund
• Special Religious Events - Wesak 
  - Annual Blessing Service - Kathina Pinkama (ceremony)
  - Annual Merit Offering - Monks’ Novitiate Programme
MAY THE BLESSINGS OF THE NOBLE TRIPLE GEM
BE WITH YOU AND YOUR FAMILY
111
Locaion Map T o Buddhis Maha Vihara
112
I / We would like to make a donation to the Buddhist Maha Vihara.
Name :
Address : 
 
 
 
Amount : RM
Towards : Free Publications
(English, Mandarin, Cantonese, Hokkien, Malay, 
Tamil, Burmese, Khmer, Nepalese, Thai, Vietnamese, 
Bengali, Chichewa, Hindi, Kannada, Kishwahili, 
Luganda, Oriya, Sinhala, Telegu, Brazilian, Dutch, 
French, Japanese, Portugese, Spanish, Swedish, 
Croatian, Marathi & German)
 Others, please specify 
 
All cheques can be made payable to: BUDDHIST MAHA 
VIHARA or TT to “BUDDHIST MAHA VIHARA” 
ACCOUNT NO: 292-00-01161-8, HONG LEONG BANK, 
BRICKFIELDS, KL. Kindly send us a copy of your BANK SLIP 
so that we can send you an OFFICIAL RECEIPT.
Donations can also be made by VISA and MasterCard at the 
Buddhist Maha Vihara Office.
DONATION FORM
Buddhist Maha Vihara
123, Jalan Berhala, Brickfields,
50470 Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan, Malaysia.
Tel: 603-2274 1141 Fax: 603-2273 2570
113

114
8
Sabba Dhanam Dhamma Dhanam Jinati
The Gift Of Truth Excels All Other Gifts
Dhammapada 
一切施中法施最胜 - 法句经
The Buddha taught children too ! 
7 year old Rahula, Sopaka, Sona, etc.
The Buddha taught children too ! 
7 year old Rahula, Sopaka, Sona, etc.
The Buddha taught children too ! 
7 year old Rahula, Sopaka, Sona, etc.
佛陀也教导小孩！
七岁的罗睺罗，苏巴卡，输那，等等。
佛陀也教导小孩！
佛陀也教导小孩！
佛陀也教导小孩！
佛陀也教导小孩！
佛陀也教导小孩！
七岁的罗睺罗，苏巴卡，输那，等等。
七岁的罗睺罗，苏巴卡，输那，等等。
七岁的罗睺罗，苏巴卡，输那，等等。
七岁的罗睺罗，苏巴卡，输那，等等。
佛陀也教导小孩！
七岁的罗睺罗，苏巴卡，输那，等等。
我们有责任教授我们的儿女佛法。
向大寺院获取一本，给予你们的儿女，侄子，侄女，孙子学习佛法的机缘。
我们有责任教授我们的儿女佛法。
向大寺院获取一本，给予你们的儿女，侄子，侄女，孙子学习佛法的机缘。
RM 20RM 20
for 
text & exercise book
for 
text & exercise book
We should teach the Dhamma to our children.
Obtain a copy from Vihara oﬃce for your children, nephew, nieces or grandchildren. 
We should teach the Dhamma to our children.
Obtain a copy from Vihara oﬃce for your children, nephew, nieces or grandchildren. 
115
Note :
116
Note :

by Ven. Dr. Madawela Punnaji Maha Theraby Ven. Dr. Madawela Punnaji Maha Thera
Sasana Abhiwurdhi Wardhana Society
佛陀教义弘扬协会
Buddhist Maha Vihara,
123, Jalan Berhala, Brickfields,
50470 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Tel: 603-2274 1141 Fax: 603-2273 2570
E-Mail: info@buddhistmahavihara.org
Website: www.buddhistmahavihara.org
 www.ksridhammananda.org
 www.cabe.org.my
 www.bisds.org
Published by