# dalal-indian-psychology
# source PDF: raw/dalal-indian-psychology.pdf | pages: 36 | ~15250 words

http://pds.sagepub.com
Societies 
Psychology & Developing
DOI: 10.1177/097133360902200105 
 2010; 22; 121 Psychology Developing Societies
Ajit K. Dalal and Girishwar Misra 
 The Core and Context of Indian Psychology
http://pds.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/22/1/121
 The online version of this article can be found at:
 Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
 at:
can be foundPsychology & Developing Societies Additional services and information for 
 http://pds.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Email Alerts:
 http://pds.sagepub.com/subscriptions Subscriptions:
 http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.navReprints: 
 http://www.sagepub.in/about/permissions.aspPermissions: 
 http://pds.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/22/1/121 Citations
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Psychology and Developing Societies  22, 1 (2010): 121–155
SAGE Publications Los Angeles/London/New Delhi/Singapore/Washington DC
DOI: 10.1177/097133360902200105
This article makes an effort to conceptualise the emerging ﬁ eld of scholarship called Indian Psychology 
(IP) in the backdrop of the disciplinary developments. After situating IP in the disciplinary matrix, 
the article articulates the meaning and scope of IP , its critical features and misconceptions about its 
conceptualisation. It is argued that IP is a school of psychology primarily rooted in the diverse Indian 
thought systems with panhuman appeal. It has potential to offer an encompassing vision which covers 
the vast expanse of the human consciousness from a dynamic experiential vantage point. As a theory 
and practice, IP is practical and transcendental in nature. While IP chieﬂ  y addresses the existential 
issues from a ﬁ rst person perspective, it is inclusive in approach and does not ignore the mundane 
concerns of everyday life and social welfare.
The Core and Context 
of Indian Psychology
AJIT K. DALAL
University of Allahabad, Allahabad
GIRISHWAR MISRA
University of Delhi, Delhi
Keywords: Indian psychology, experiential knowledge, transcendental, 
tradition, self
Acknowledgements: The authors are highly grateful to two anonymous reviewers and also to 
Anand C. Paranjpe, R.C. T ripathi and Matthijs Cornelissen for their constructive criticism of 
the  earlier versions of this article. 
Address correspondence concerning this article to Ajit K. Dalal, Department of Psychology, 
University of Allahabad, Allahabad – 211 002, India. ajitdalal@hotmail.com
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
122 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology
Indian Psychology (IP) has its roots in the diverse traditions of knowledge 
deliberated upon in various texts (Shastra), as well as the practices, artifacts 
and meanings embodied in various forms, shared by the people (Loka) in the 
zone of Indian civilisation. It is part of a living tradition which has continued 
unabated since time immemorial. As Thapar (2002) has remarked “at certain 
levels there are aspects of cultural traditions in India that can be traced to 
roots as far back as a few thousand years” (p. xxv) (see also Basham, 1954). 
Therefore, IP is different and broader than the academic psychology as it 
began in India in the beginning of the last century under the aegis of the 
scheme of Western domination. IP characterises the Indian psychological 
viewpoints which are rooted in the Indian civilisation. IP has evolved through 
rigorous observation, experimentation and reﬂ  ection, through training 
under Gurus, continuous contemplation and sharing of personal accounts of 
inner experiences. This knowledge base has grown, diversiﬁ ed and survived 
through many challenges and upheavals. It still continues, in a plural mode, 
to shape in explicit, as well as, implicit ways the dominant cultural ethos 
of the Indian people. 
The thought systems and practices of IP , however, are panhuman in their 
basic conceptual orientation (Nakamura, 1997). Integrally bound with 
Eastern philosophies, IP has evolved not as a moralistic but as a cultural dis-
course on world views and epistemologies, which offers an alternative to the 
logico-positivistic enterprise of Western psychology. Though originated in 
the Indian subcontinent, the concern has been to free human beings from 
bondages and suffering, wherever they are located and whatever their sources 
are. This discourse has grown around the essential nature of one’s being and 
the various paths through which one comes to know about it. IP has en-
deavoured for creating choices, ﬁ nding out one’s own dharma (duty) and 
pursuing one’s own path of evolution in a wider time–space framework. It 
situates human functioning in the cosmic context within which are embedded 
the personal, interpersonal and communal level engagements. Such an ethos 
tends to promote democracy in ideas. It offers freedom to engage in diverse 
modes in a spirit of pluralistic enquiry and engagement. Indeed IP is built 
on the ediﬁ ce of diverse schools of materialistic/realistic as well as idealistic 
thoughts. They offer disparate perspectives on understanding life and its 
potential for participatory growth and evolution in an interdependent 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 123
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
world of existence. Menon (2005) takes the view that IP has expanded the 
conventional deﬁ nition of psychology from the “science of human behaviour” 
to “human possibility and progress”. It has nurtured a world view informed 
by continuity, interdependence and connectivity across all life forms. It em-
phasises an inclusive notion of ﬁ  eld rather than individual as the centre 
of reality. The ﬁ eld (Kshetra) and knower of the ﬁ  eld (Kshetrajya) are not 
mutually excusive. By situating humans in a wider space–time continuum, 
this tradition offers a whole range of theories and concepts pregnant with 
many exciting hypotheses about human nature, their life course and modal-
ities of worldly engagements. 
Indian sages and thinkers were struck by the immensity of the universe 
and the empirically inexhaustible mystery of life. This wonder of ex-
istence is portrayed in the hymns of the Vedas, which attribute divinity to 
the striking aspects of nature (Radhakrishnan, 1953) and the human mind 
(Sri Aurobindo, 1939/2006). In the Vedic texts it was held that the universe 
has evolved out of One. This ﬁ rst principle of “that One” (tad ekam) is con-
sidered uncharacterisable. It is without qualities or attributes, neither positive 
nor negative. Any attempt to describe it is to delimit and bind that which 
is limitless and unbounded. All gods and deities are of late or secondary 
origin ( R¸ g Veda, Nasadiya Sukta 10:129). What is important here is the 
view that holds continuity (Avyaya Bhava) and complimentarity in various 
forms or manifestations of reality. It leads one to perceive unity in diversity 
and seeing no contradiction between the opposites. Thus, though all later 
thinkers derived their inspiration from the Vedas, they were open minded 
and exercised freedom to interpret and elaborate the text(s) in different ways. 
The Upanishads are not the thoughts of a single thinker; they evolved over 
a period of time through scholarly discourses and contemplation. In the 
Upanishads, the interest shifted from objective to the subjective, from outside 
world to self in whose inﬁ nite depths the universe is reﬂ ected in its entirety. 
The Upanishads give in some detail the path of the inner ascent, the inward 
journey towards ultimate reality. The Upanishadic seers extended the tenets 
of spirituality to the utmost bounds of human existence. The diversity of 
ideas, concepts and visions encapsuled in the verses of the Upanishads has 
inspired generations of thinkers and has laid the foundations of IP .
It may be mentioned in this context that the Vedic seers admitted in 
all humility that their proposition of the creation was only a surmise, 
for it is not possible to be sure of the events that occurred in the distant 
past. They also conceded that the perfect and absolute cannot be known 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
124 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
through the imperfect human mind. What is known about life and existence 
is therefore conjectural, logical and intuitive in most of the cases. Skepticism 
and questioning is very much built-in in the mode of inquiry in the R¸ g Veda 
itself. It is said of Indra, “Of whom they ask, where is he? Of him indeed 
they also say, he is not.” (the R¸ g Veda II 12). Such doubts are frequently raised 
throughout the classical texts and subsequently a whole system of inquiry 
called the Nya¯ya was developed to ensure errorless thinking. Systematic 
dialogue (Samva¯d ) has been a potent method of advancing understanding 
about life and the universe. In the case of testing premises about self and 
transcendental knowledge, self-veriﬁ cation by using ﬁ rst-person experiential 
methods, like meditation, was considered to be the best option. This tradition 
of questioning and free thinking provided impetus to IP for centuries, and 
with many ups and downs, and setbacks it kept prospering till the recent 
times. In what follows, we present a brief history of IP and then note the 
changing perceptions of IP . We trace the disciplinary contours of IP and note 
its distinguishing features. T o clarify the nature of IP we then discuss what 
is not the core of IP , before concluding the article.
Brief Historical Background
For the last 100 years of its existence, the contents and practices of teaching–
learning of psychology in India has been dominated by the Euro-American 
tradition. The ﬁ rst department of psychology established at Calcutta University 
in 1916 was a discipline imported from the West but was supposedly universal 
in contents and theories. This incarnation of psychology was imbued with a 
Western spirit of objective knowledge and other-oriented methodology. Even 
after the political independence of India in 1947, psychology continued to 
grow in the same institutional framework and learning paradigm with its 
anchor deeply entrenched in behaviourist ideology. It has been alien in the 
sense that the teaching was primarily in terms of sharing and propagating the 
Euro-American principles and practices, rather than applying and linking to 
social reality with an open mind. Though it did expand rapidly in the Indian 
universities and institutes of higher learning and professional training, it 
mainly served the purpose of substantiating and illustrating the principles of 
Western scientiﬁ c psychology taking Indian samples with little contribution 
to the (supposedly universal) body of knowledge pool called psychology. 
While some scholars did try to relate to Indian ethos and attended to explicate 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 125
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
indigenous sources of knowledge they did that privately, and the public 
face projected in curriculum and teaching programme did not incorporate 
that as legitimate and worthwhile. The idea of psychology and its preferred 
way of categorisation and conceptualisation was held pre- or a-cultural and 
culture was given no place in the constitution of psychological materials 
or elements. For example, motives, drives, needs, perceptual learning and 
various cognitive phenomena were kept separate from the cultural tradition. 
The dynamics of creating a niche for a new discipline and the pressures to 
form a identity amid physical science disciplines might have led to this. By the 
mid-1970s, discontentment was brewing among some Indian psychologists 
who cared for application and relevance of their efforts (Dalal, 1996). T o 
the vast majority, a psychology patterned after physical science model was 
treated as intrinsically universal in which there was no scope for Indian or 
for that matter any other non-Western perspective. 
The trinity of materialism, quantiﬁ  cation and objectivity of Western 
psychology and commitment to the very goal of science to control and mani-
pulate others fascinated Indian psychologists. This ethos of a new science 
of psychology was so captivating that most of the courses became immune 
to the cultural context. For instance, the courses offered at Masters level 
had a compulsory component of history of psychology but they were silent 
about Indian contributions, nor was there any disciplinary engagement with 
Indian culture and society but Greek, British, other European and American 
philosophical contributions captured the entire space. Such a decontextual-
ised training could survive merely on the ground of metatheoretical sup-
positions of the universality of the basic principles of psychology, its way 
of categorisation and understanding. It subscribed to a mechanistic and 
reductionist framework supported by an empiricist methodology. 
It may be noted that the growth of scientiﬁ c psychology has resulted in 
losing the essential constituents, such as psyche and consciousness, and making 
the enterprise an empirical discipline, which is composed of things borrowed 
from various disciplines and nothing of its own. As such psychology is so 
disintegrated and fragmented that a meaningful deﬁ nition of the discipline 
is next to impossible. T oday psychology is experiencing fragmentation and its 
diverse applications make it contingent on variable contexts (Misra & Kumar, 
in press). The illusion of developing grand empirically derived theories and 
principles of human behaviour and action could not sustain for long. One 
ﬁ nds distinct changes in the academic scenario in the ﬁ  eld of psychology 
that have created avenues for an engagement with culture. The emergence 
of cross-cultural, ethno, indigenous and cultural psychological approaches 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
126 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
brought into focus the signiﬁ  cance of culture in understanding psycho-
logical processes. Also, the supremacy of physical science as the prototype of 
inquiry into human affairs has been questioned by the philosophers of science 
(Derrida, 1982; Foucault, 1977; Gergen, 1989). This has led to revision 
of the nature of understanding of science and scientiﬁ c enterprise. A related 
development has been the increasing use of qualitative methods which rely 
on subjectivity, human experience and a constructivist approach to human 
understanding. These developments facilitated the emergence of a critical 
look at the disciplinary affairs and various possibilities have emerged. 
The realisations within the community of psychologists in India emanating 
from self-reﬂ ection and growing discomfort with the limitations of academic 
engagements within the received paradigm, at conceptual as well as societal 
planes, led to nationwide reﬂ ection and debate among Indian psychologists. 
The result was a distinct clamour to indigenise the prevailing Euro-American 
discipline and to make it culturally sensitive. D. Sinha (1965) gave a call for 
integration of modern psychology with Indian thought. Many signiﬁ  cant 
works involving critique and reconstruction have come out in the following 
decades. Sinha’s writings (1981, 1986, 1997, 1998) persistently endeavoured 
to make the point that psychology has to be culturally relevant and called 
for indigenisation of the discipline. A large number of publications have 
come out during this period critically reviewing the state of psychology in 
India and urging psychologists to make it socially relevant and compatible 
with the Indian ethos (Dalal, 1996; Gergen et al., 1996; Misra & Gergen, 
1993; Misra & Mohanty, 2002; Misra et al., 1999; Pandey, 2001, 2004; 
D. Sinha, 2000). Amid much confusion and lack of self-conﬁ  dence the 
move to articulate and nurture psychology with Indian concepts and theories 
took considerable time in gathering momentum. However, these efforts to 
rejuvenate psychology in the ancient texts intensiﬁ ed in the 1980s and 1990s. 
Some notable publications of this period are by Paranjpe (1984, 1998), 
Chakraborty (1995), Saraswathi (1999) and Rao (1988, 2002a, 2002b). 
This stream has built not only on the interpretation of traditional concepts 
and theories in contemporary idiom, but also on their integration within a 
broader, global perspective. A comprehensive approach to IP involves issues 
of justice and dana (Krishnan, 2005), poverty (Misra & T ripathi, 2004), 
interpersonal relationship (Kakar & Kakar, 2007), organisational develop-
ment (Singh-Sengupta, 2001, creativity (Bhawuk, 2003), concept of self 
(Bhawuk, 2005), pain and suffering (Anand, 2004, 2006), emotions and 
affect (Bhawuk, 2008a; Jain, 2002; Misra, 2004, 2005; Paranjpe, 2009) 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 127
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
religious behaviour and devotion (Paranjpe, 2006) and peace and well being 
(Bhawuk, 1999; Dalal & Misra, 2006; Kumar, 2004), to name just a few.
In more recent times, efforts to build IP as a vibrant discipline have in-
tensiﬁ ed. Several conferences (Puducherry, 2001, 2002, 2004; Kollam, 2001; 
Delhi, 2002, 2003, 2007; Vishakhapatnam, 2002, 2003, 2006; Bengaluru, 
2007) have given impetus to this movement of IP . The publication of the 
Journal of Indian psychology  since 1976, National Academy of Psychology 
(NAOP) Conventions at Kanpur (2007) and Guahati (2008), refresher 
courses in IP at Mysore, courses at IP Institute at Puducherry for the last four 
years, publications, such as Misra and Mohanty’s Perspectives on Indigenous 
Psychology (2002), Joshi and Cornelissen’s edited volume, Consciousness, 
Indian Psychology and Yoga (2004); Rao and Marwaha’s T owards a Spiritual 
Psychology (2005); Rao, Paranjpe and Dalal’s Handbook of Indian Psychology 
(2008) has made rich source material on IP available. 
The newly emerging psychology is rooted in traditional Indian thought 
and practices that have existed at least for the last 2,500 years as a holistic 
human science. The plurality of the Indian intellectual tradition and an ethos 
of accommodating diverse thought systems extend immense opportunity 
for creatively building a new psychology. As stated in the Pondy Manifesto 
(Cornelissen, 2002), “Rich in content, sophisticated in its methods and valuable 
in its applied aspects, Indian psychology is pregnant with possibilities for the birth 
of new models in psychology that would have relevance not only for India but 
also for psychology in general.” This manifesto signed by the delegates at the 
IP conference at Puducherry was a landmark event in the history of IP . 
It needs to be made explicit that the purpose of identifying, developing and 
testing Indian concepts and theories is not to prove their intrinsic superiority. 
It is a theoretical and methodological movement towards contemporising 
Indian theories and testing their relevance for enhancing human potential, 
enhancing well being and making this world a better place to live. It is 
against this backdrop that IP is gearing itself to usher into a new era of many 
exciting possibilities. 
The Changing Perceptions of IP
Ostensibly, there is a change in attitude and perception of IP in the last 
decade or so. That IP is growing in popularity among academic psychologists 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
128 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
as well as among practitioners is evident from the quantum of research and 
professional activities in this ﬁ eld. Three factors that have contributed to this 
change in attitudes towards and perceptions of IP are discussed here. 
First, Western psychology has failed in dealing with the societal problems 
that are faced by the people in non-Western world. It has increasingly been 
realised that psychology driven by the positivist paradigm only provides a 
fragmented and superﬁ cial account of human feelings, behaviour and the 
dynamics of action of an isolated individual (Nandy, 1988). The growing 
problems of social and family violence, mental ill health, moral decay, etc., 
have brought out the gross limitations of the mainstream Western psychology 
to the Western scholars also. The concept of human being as epicentre of the 
universe and container of myriads of psychological attributes (e.g., abilities, 
motives, interests, goals, dispositions, cognitions, aptitudes) is ﬂ awed as it 
does not capture the totality of existential context of life. The principles 
thus derived were largely framed within a deﬁ cit model and ignored certain 
important and afﬁ rmative human phenomena (e.g., religion, spirituality, 
suffering, values, authenticity, creativity, love, collectivism, forgiveness), 
which have emerged under the rubric of positive psychology (Snyder & 
Lopez, 2002). As a movement within positivistic epistemological tradition, 
positive psychology too is not equipped to handle inner, personal, cultural 
and subjective aspects of life. These issues were either left unattended or 
appropriated in a trivial fashion that made them less appealing.
It is interesting to note that the limitations of the practices of positivist 
psychology were noted in the Western world too. For instance, Worchel and 
Cooper (1989) had discussed the crisis in modern social psychology and 
its limitations in dealing with the contemporary social problems. Humanistic 
and transpersonal movements in the 1960s were largely protest movements 
against scientism which is primarily concerned about control and pre-
diction, ignoring phenomenological perspective in psychological research 
(Wertz, 1998). Modern psychotherapies too are going through a crisis of 
identity and a debate is raging about their goals, philosophy and moral 
vision (VandenBos, 1996). A need is felt to bring back spirituality and 
religiosity in psychological research and theorisation (Bhawuk, 2003), 
which was banished from psychology for about a century (see special issue 
of the American Psychologist, January 2004). All these contemporary devel-
opments are in response to the acutely felt limitations of psychology developed 
and practised within the framework of modern science. Modelled on the 
mechanistic–reductionistic paradigm of physical sciences, Western psychology 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 129
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
is very restrictive in its assumptions about human nature and cannot deal 
with larger human concerns. A rethinking has led to the emergence of new 
perspectives and paradigms in psychology (i.e., in terms of feminism, social 
constructionism, postmodernism) (Gergen 2007, 2009; Stanley, 1990), 
which in certain ways bridges the gap between Eastern and Western under-
standing of human nature. 
Second, there is growing popularity of Yoga and other spiritual systems 
in the West. In the past few decades, more and more people with spiritual 
training and experiences from India have been visiting other countries and have 
acquired a large following. They have been responsible for disseminating the 
Indian spiritual tradition. Among them, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and Swami 
Rama who have been able to draw the attention of academic psychologists 
are prominent. Sri Aurobindo’s Integral Yoga and Integral Psychology have 
attracted worldwide attention (Sri Aurobindo, The Integral Yoga, The Life 
Divine in 2 volumes). Mahesh Yogi’s T ranscendental Meditation (TM) went 
through rigorous experimental testing at Harvard and other universities. 
Swami Rama offered himself to extensive medical testing at the Menninger 
Foundation Laboratory, New York, where he demonstrated many yogic 
feats (Swami Ram et al., 1976). These Indian masters were able to demonstrate 
convincingly the power of mind over body and have contributed signiﬁ cantly 
towards evoking interest in the explication of Indian perspectives. The 
presence of Ram Krishna Mission, Swami Narayan, Shivanand, Muktanand 
and Sikh saints and many who settled in the West have also contributed to 
generate interest in IP . Publications of Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Puducherry, 
and the Himalayan International Institute for Yoga Sciences, Philosophy, 
and Religion in Honesdale, Pennsylvania, founded by Swami Rama, are 
valuable for their signiﬁ cant role in expounding the psychological insights 
of Vedanta, Yoga, Samkhya and other systems of Indian thought. These 
and many other accomplished spiritual masters of the Indian tradition have 
played an important role in popularising IP across the globe (Paranjpe, 2006). 
Mahatma Gandhi’s life and works have also inspired modern thinking on 
peace, development and conﬂ ict resolution (Bondurant, 1965; Horsburgh, 
1968; Pelton, 1974). 
Though rooted in Indian scriptures and philosophical texts, IP does not 
promote any religious faith, nor is it based on any particular metaphysics; 
rather it has a quality that transcends all religious boundaries and does not 
offend any faith or ideology. Various schools of thought within Indian 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
130 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
system cover the whole range of theistic and atheistic (for example, Sankhya 
and Charvak) postulates of life. Also, IP has drawn not only from ideology 
and scriptures of Hinduism but also from other schools of thought, including 
Buddhism, Jainism and Suﬁ sm. Yoga and meditation, for example, are not 
limited to any particular religious faith and can be tested and practised by 
the people of all faiths anywhere. IP has much to offer in terms of self-
growth, independent of any speciﬁ  c religious tradition. How to liberate 
human beings from the bondage of ignorance, suffering and to create a social 
order of harmony, peace and personal growth constitute its major agenda. 
A human being in such a conceptualisation is not merely an intelligent 
live structure interested in survival and self growth. Instead he or she is an 
active and responsible part (or partner) of nature and its growth and survival 
are contingent upon the growth and survival of other co-inhabitants of this 
universe. T o this end one’s consciousness itself operates as a great asset. In 
the West, interest in the study of altered states of consciousness since the 
1960s and the founding of transpersonal psychology as a sub-discipline 
encouraged psychologists to examine some of the indigenous perspectives. It 
was recognised clearly that Western psychology has nothing to offer regarding 
the spiritual/transcendental dimension of human nature, to understand others 
or for self-realisation (Tart, 1975, 2009). 
Third, with India emerging as a major economic power in the world, 
there is a renewed interest in Indian thought systems, values and practices, 
as well as in the strength and resilience of Indian society. Till the 17th and 
18th centuries when India was one of the richest countries in the world, 
European opinion about India was unequivocally positive. Indian philosophy, 
mysticism, art and literature were looked upon with awe and appreciation. 
It was in the later period when Indian civilisation was in decadence and 
became impoverished due to colonisation, reducing India to one of the 
poorest countries, that the Western indologists (Mccaulay 1835/1972, 
James Mill1) started debunking Indian culture and philosophy for India’s 
poverty and backwardness. Western scholarship had unique reading of 
Indian culture that attributes India’s underdevelopment to the lack of traits 
1 James Mill (1848), in an inﬂ uential book on the history of British India, throughout referred 
to Indians as “rude”, “lazy”, “timid”, “ignorant”, and “prone to ﬂ attery”. These claims to Hindu 
inferiority and British superiority, as reﬂ ected in Mill’s (1848, republished by Atlantic Publishers, 
London, 2007) work, were largely based on cultural and religious comparisons rather than on 
racial or physiological differences.
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 131
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
and characteristics found in the industrialised Western societies. Thus, low 
n-Ach (McClelland, 1961), dependence proneness (Doi, 1973), hierarchy 
and relational orientation (Hofstede, 1980) were treated as negative at-
tributes. Interestingly the situation has changed in recent years. The same 
Indian culture and its philosophy are now seen behind India’s economic 
success. With Indian economy going from strength to strength and with 
the visibility of Indian IT professionals at strategic locations worldwide, the 
attitudes and perceptions about the Indian way of thinking have changed 
(Varma, 2004). The number of courses taught in American and European 
universities on Indian culture, philosophy, spirituality, art and music has 
increased signiﬁ cantly. Indian research acquired greater respectability and is 
now taken more seriously by the Western psychologists and as a consequence 
(ironically), by Indian psychologists themselves. 
The Disciplinary Contours
What is Indian in IP? In terms of ﬁ eld, content and methodology IP maintains 
distinct position, which differs from the widely held assumptions of Western 
psychology. Even when consciousness, mind and intuition are included as the 
subject matter, IP stands as a body of knowledge rooted and pursued with 
different ontological and epistemological premises. More than materialistic–
deterministic aspects of human existence, IP takes a more inclusive spiritual-
growth perspective on human existence. In this sense no clear distinction is 
made between psychology, philosophy and spirituality,2 as conjointly they 
constitute a comprehensive and practical knowledge or wisdom about human 
life. Another point to be noted is that IP has originated and prospered in the 
larger geographical region of Indian subcontinent and is compatible with 
the cultural and social life of the people, it has, never been restricted to any 
given region. It fashioned itself on an existential plane which aspired for the 
upliftment of humanity in general instead of the people of Indian origin 
only. IP thrived on protest movements, as Buddhism and Jainism were and 
2 In this article, a distinction is made between spirituality and religion. Whereas religion 
is an organised, institutionalised activity, spirituality is taken as an individual’s quest to know 
own-self and to carve out their own path to liberation. This has created confusion in Western 
psychology in which these two terms are used interchangeably. If we can replace religion with 
spirituality, a synthesis of science and spirituality is a possibility. 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
132 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
also on other philosophies of the region, such as Zoroastrianism and Suﬁ sm. 
Its inﬂ uence in the ancient times was far beyond the borders of greater India, 
Tibet, China, Japan and Korea and in the south up to Sri Lanka, Malaysia 
and Indonesia. In the west, Afghanistan, Iran and up to middle Asia came 
under its inﬂ uence (Winternitz, 1927). IP was in communion with other 
contemporary philosophies of the East, such as Tao, Zen Buddhism; and 
this mutual inﬂ uence is very much visible even today. They provided the 
intellectual and spiritual ﬁ rmament to generate new ideas and explanations 
as evident in post-Upanishad texts (such as Shankar’s non-dualism). Theories 
and practices of IP address wider existential issues and are relevant for the 
humanity at large in an inclusive manner. Though the term “Indian Psy-
chology” implies a psychology of Indian origin, or a psychology that has 
grown in the Indian subcontinent, it functions at a level of abstraction 
which covers the humanity in general. It is only a coincidence that the term 
Indian Psychology is used by the pioneers in this ﬁ eld, like Jadunath Sinha 
who brought out three volumes entitled Indian Psychology (1933–1958), 
Rhys Davids’s book, The Birth of Indian Psychology and its Development in 
Buddhism (1936/1978), Raghunath Safaya’s Indian Psychology (1975) and 
Kuppuswami’s book Elements of Ancient Indian Psychology (1985) . The latest 
in this sequel is Handbook of Indian Psychology , an edited volume by Rao, 
Paranjpe and Dalal (2008). The term IP has thus come to stay. 
Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, although no clear distinction was made 
between psychology and philosophy in the earlier times, IP is psychology, 
not just pure philosophical exposition of truth and intellectual debates. It 
is an applied and practical science which leads to testable hypotheses and 
experimentation aiming at inner transformation. As a science of a multi-
layered being, comprising subtle inner being, physical being and social being 
(Bhawuk, 2005, 2008a; Kumar, 2008); its propositions could not be tested 
by the accepted empirical methods of inquiry alone but require a broad 
spectrum of methodologies, calling for a wise and balanced deployment 
of ﬁ  rst person, second person and third person perspectives (Bhawuk, 
2008b). The process of knowing is informed by an encompassing world 
view and pattern of social life weaved with the threads of the Self and the 
sacred/divinity. From this vantage point, IP is a living science, formulated, 
tested, modiﬁ ed and contextualised in the course of challenges encountered 
during struggles and tensions experienced in real life. It is an enterprise con-
cerning spiritual development with rich epistemological tradition. It grew 
in tradition of critical examination where scholars and sages continuously 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 133
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
proposed, analysed, interpreted, reﬁ ned and transmitted knowledge to the 
worthy disciples. It is remarkable that these institutions survived all along 
without much state support. Apparently IP is a complex ﬁ eld of knowledge 
comprising philosophy ( Darshana), life science ( A¯ yurveda), principles of 
personal and social conduct ( Dharma Sha¯stra, Neeti, Artha Sha ¯stra, Ka¯ma 
Sha¯stra ), spirituality ( A¯ dhya¯tma Vidya¯ ), Jain and Buddhist scriptures, and 
texts of various socio-spiritual movements. The Muslim inﬂ uence, particularly 
that of Suﬁ sm and Bahai, is also visible. 
After centuries of unabated growth, the new educational policy in British 
India in the nineteenth century brought forth a wholesale replacement of 
Indian “knowledge-culture” by the Western, in the ﬁ eld of education par-
ticularly (Dharampal, 2000). When universities were established in India 
on the British pattern, the concerns and contents of IP survived in some of 
the philosophy departments. As Cornelissen (2003) has observed, as long 
as philosophy and psychology were considered two sides of the same quest, 
there were philosophy departments where psychologists could possibly have 
access to the Indian tradition. But in the late 1950s when philosophy and 
psychology departments separated in Indian universities, psychologists turned 
en-mass toward Freud and behaviourism, and even this weak link was severed. 
Psychology as a discipline conﬁ ned itself to the analysis of the visible world 
of concrete behaviour like any static, non living physical object that can be 
measured and manipulated without any resistance. 
The endogenous psychology, which underlines the contemporary relevance 
of cultural heritage and native theories is what constitutes “IP”. The plurality 
of Indian tradition and an ethos of accommodating diverse thought systems 
(e.g., Veda¯nt, Sa¯mkhya,Yoga, A¯yurveda, Mima¯nsa, Jainism, Buddhism, 
Suﬁ sm, Sikhism) offer a gold mine for building a more comprehensive and 
efﬁ cacious psychology. The precepts of IP encompass the entire range of 
human concerns and it is not possible to enumerate all of them here. However, 
as a point of departure from the accepted Western framework it seems in 
order to brieﬂ y mention a select few of them.
1. The four Purusharthas (life pursuits), which are dharma (virtues and 
rightful obligations/duty), artha (material prosperity), ka¯ma  (ful-
ﬁ lment of desires) and moksha (liberation) cover the entire range of 
human possibilities and strivings, irrespective of caste, creed or religion. 
For a happy and fulﬁ lling life these strivings should be pursued in 
harmony with Dharma (social ethos). T o this end it is held that the 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
134 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
pursuit of goals like artha and ka¯ma  have to be made compatible 
with the requirements of dharma. Also, the idea of equanimity with 
respect to life experiences, positive or negative, is a major learning in 
the Bhagavad-Gita. Attachment with worldly objects and experiences 
are purely temporary and are of binding nature. Attachment to them 
ultimately destroys one’s life. The Bhagavad-Gita draws a temporal 
sequence of mental events as: Attachment → Desire → Anger →
Mindlessness → Loss of memory → Loss of life (Bhawuk, 1999, 
and also in this issue for a psychological model that captures these 
ideas). 
2. It studies consciousness in its multifaceted manifestations and retains 
the core identity as a basic attribute. It recognises multilayered ex-
istence (Panch Koshas) of human being, which has the potential to 
evolve and move towards higher levels of existence. The mere physical 
level ( A¯ nnamaya kosha ) is the lowest level, and gradually through 
other levels Pra¯namaya , Manomaya, Vijñanmaya , it goes to the level 
of A¯ nandamaya Kosha. The true identity (A¯tman) of sat-chit-a¯nand  
entails the highest level of existence (for a synthesis of pancha kosha 
and physical, social and metaphysical self, see Bhawuk 2008a). The 
contingent and acquired identities/superimposed attributes (upa¯dhis ) 
need not be confused with the core identity (A¯ tman) which remains 
unaffected and functions as a witness ( sa¯kshi ) (see Shankara in 
Vivekchudamani verse 501). This is the reason why there has been an 
emphasis on wise discrimination between permanent and impermanent 
(Nityanitya Viveka). The apparent existence is often considered as 
illusion (Ma¯ya¯/Prakriti) within which normal life is carried. It is the 
manifestation of the A¯ tman that is often given independent and greater 
signiﬁ cance than A¯ tman because of misunderstanding (avidya¯ ). This 
avidya¯  is the main cause of attachments and consequent suffering. The 
existence of the same A¯ tman in every human being offers a new way to 
see the prospects of humanity that deemphasises the differences and 
draws attention to the intrinsic oneness of the humanity. It furnishes 
a rich ground for a spiritual psychology with Jiva (embodied A¯ tman) 
as the functioning unit. Its deliberations aim at developing principles 
that transform human beings for higher level of evolution. 
  The purpose of knowledge in traditional terminology, therefore, 
is liberation ( mukti) from various attachments and overcoming the 
various kinds of suffering (kleshas) and ignorance. This, however, is not 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 135
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
“otherworldly” as the ideal personhood is to be Jivanmukta—living 
a life with liberation. Expansion of identity for making it more 
encompassing and inclusive is the core of learning in this thinking. 
This implies that one must transcend the boundaries of ego since 
ego is not the real/true identity of a person. Coming out of the grips 
of egoistic attachments and engaging with non-egoistic or spiritual 
pursuits is a proposition, which is worth considering in the context of 
global challenge of sustainable development. Indian classical theories 
provide insight into the crisis caused by competition, consumerism 
and selﬁ shness.
3. IP recognises the interplay of the manifest and unmanifest parts 
of our existence in shaping the events in this world. This makes 
room for going beyond strict determinism, accepting the emergent 
nature of reality. It suggests plausible explanations and strategies to 
deal with uncertainty. An important illustration of this is found in 
terms of classiﬁ cation of human action ( Karma) in terms of Sanchit 
(accumulated) and Pra¯rabdha  (in-action) Karma. This classiﬁ cation 
implies that human action/behaviour is an evolving process, one that 
unfolds in the course of time. Also important is the idea of distributed 
notion of locus of control. IP has also expanded the notion of causality 
beyond self and non-self (internal–external) categories of perceived 
causes. Any action depends on the contribution of ﬁ  ve factors, i.e., 
karta¯  (agent), karma (action), adhistha¯na  (body), karana (instruments) 
and daivam ( providence)—The Bhagavad-Gita (Ch. 18.14). The actor 
is one of them and contributes just a part of the total. This is in contrast 
to the usual categories of internal and external attribution, which lies 
within the domain of egoistic self. 
4. IP emphasises an organic view often explained in terms of the metaphor 
of seed and tree. This implies that continuity and transformation are 
inherent characteristics of life processes. In a major departure from 
linear mode of thinking this metaphor underlines non-linear or cyclical 
mode of life functioning. It also implies the signiﬁ cance of unmanifest 
in shaping one’s life. 
5. The human experience is complex and its study requires multiple 
methods, including the third person, second person and ﬁ  rst per-
son methods. IP is not opposed to empirical methods as pratyaksha 
(perception) is one method (prama¯na ) accepted by all the schools of 
Indian thought but it is certainly not sufﬁ cient, particularly when we 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
136 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
aim at both para¯  (self) and apara¯  (empirical) vidyas (knowledge). Being 
and knowing become one once we venture towards transcendental 
realm. The empirical methods are not enough to address the entire 
range of human experiences. 
6. IP does not view human action as neutral, value free or a-moral. Instead 
it brings out the essential interdependence and interconnectedness 
of the worlds of human experience in which human beings are re-
sponsible players. At one level it proclaims essential unity and asserts 
that self and non-self are identical in their constitution (i.e., yat pinde 
tad brahmande). This expands the scope of a discourse on human 
action. 
7. While explaining human action, IP takes into account not only the 
actor but also the linkages among the person, time and place. With 
emphasis on dèsh  (space), ka¯l  (time) and pa¯tra  (participant/person) it 
recognises the non-linear and emergent nature of action that deﬁ  es 
simple descriptions in terms of binary categories of cause and effect 
(e.g., independent and dependent variables, predictors and criterion). 
It is largely discursive and narrative, and cannot be reduced to simple 
binary categories. It is supplemented by the position taken by one 
Indian school of thought that assumes continuity between cause and 
effect (satkarya vada). It is reﬂ ected in the principle of Karma held 
by a vast majority of the Indians that refers to the sequence of actions 
constituting cause and effect. Thus, actions necessarily entail certain 
consequences. This scheme also empowers the actor to shape the 
future course of events by engaging in a responsible action. One lives 
life in obligational relationship (r.ina¯s ) with (guru, r.ish, pitri, bhuta). 
Life therefore is a kind of sacriﬁ ce (yajna), a sacriﬁ ce of one’s desires 
and ego. 
8. Instead of merely describing reality, IP emphasises on and promotes 
self positive qualities through personal training and practice. The goal 
of such training is to nurture a balanced personality, which primarily 
involves sa¯tvik, ra ¯jasic and ta¯msik gunas  or qualities. Interestingly 
enough the objects in the surrounding environment also share these 
three properties and ﬁ nally transcend them. Therefore, the life style 
should involve a harmonious relationship with one’s environment and 
not by subjugating the environment. Such a relationship is mutually 
supportive for person and environment and does not tax any one of 
them. The A¯ yurveda talks of this harmony at the level of diet, action 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 137
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
and leisure to maintain health. Health is a state of balance (samatva) 
and a healthy person is one who is self-anchored (swastha) in a world 
of ﬂ ux (samsa¯r ) with a body ( sharira) that decays. It must be noted 
that while everyone has all the three gunas, they exist in different 
combinations leading to a state of (im)balance reﬂ ected in the choice 
of actions and ensuring the health of mind, body and spirit. A dis-
tinction has also been made between godlike and demonic qualities 
(daivi and asuri sampat ) and it is recommended to evolve in the 
direction of godlike qualities. One’s well being requires adhering to 
a personal and social conduct rooted in virtuous life (sukhasya mulah 
dharmah—Chanakya). 
9. The aspiration for transcendental existence helps overcome the body-
centred egoistic strivings and offers a decentred view of self. It has 
implications for work and social relationships. It allows one to be 
motivated to treat work as a natural duty (dharma) to be performed 
with reference to the demands of the location in one’s life space rather 
than any extrinsic incentive. It is one’s humble contribution to the 
worldly operations. Instead of emphasising on the outcome or reward 
outside the work context, this kind of thinking promotes competence 
in action as yoga ( yogah karmasu kaushalam ). Such competence re-
quires sustained and detached action (anasakti). As indicated earlier, 
any action is made possible by several factors therefore attributing 
causality to self is ignorance. A person is a mere instrument (nimitta) 
of divinity and, therefore, it is heightened egotism, which assigns 
personal causality. 
Some Distinguishing Features of IP
Despite all diversity and distinctiveness, there are some features common 
across all systems and schools relevant to IP . Some of these common features, 
which give IP a distinct identity, are brieﬂ y discussed here. 
IP is deemed to be a universal psychology. It cannot be subsumed under the 
labels of indigenous, folk or cultural psychology, if that purports to delimit 
the scope of psychological inquiry. For want of a new term it has been also 
labelled as Greater Psychology (Dalal, 2000). The vast expanse of IP attends 
to the perennial issues of human existence (e.g., human strivings, virtues, 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
138 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
self-understanding, self-control, Yoga, meditation, human conduct, pain, 
misery, kleshas, happiness, bliss, health, well being, justice, morality, conﬂ ict) 
which are not bound by any geographical region or time period. Centuries 
back the sages and thinkers were raising questions and attempted to address 
problems that are pertinent even today. In this sense, IP is both ancient 
and contemporary at the same time. Indeed, the use of the term “Indian 
psychology” is more of a convenience; may be a more appropriate term is 
“psychology of Indian origin” (Rao, 2008). While the roots of IP are decidedly 
Indian, it was never proposed as the psychology of the Indian people. For 
instance, Buddhist psychology,3 which is an integral part of IP , ﬂ ourished in 
Sri Lanka, Tibet and Japan among other countries. Most of these theories are 
propounded as trans-historical, dealing with the intrinsic state and ways to 
enhance the human potential. It can be mentioned in this context that the 
teachings and training in IP are not intended for any particular class, caste or 
creed, but people from all strata of the society can make themselves worthy 
of these pursuits (Radhakrishnan, 1953). Contrary to the misperception that 
traditional wisdom is accessible to men or Brahmins only, many women and 
non-Brahmins have attained the highest level of knowledge. The declaration 
“aham bramha¯smi ” (I am brahman) is always followed by the phrase “ tat 
tvam asi” (you are the same), which refers not only to all mankind but also 
to all living beings. 
Another important feature of IP is that it primarily deals with the inner 
states of a person, taking consciousness as the primary subject matter of study. 
Instead of emphasising numerous contingent and non-contingent variations 
in acquired role-related behaviour, the stress is on unchanging identity. In the 
Upanis¸ads consciousness as a state of being is not an object but is conceived 
as undifferentiated subjectivity (Chit) without any content (Radhakrishnan, 
1953). In the Indian tradition, consciousness happens to be the ground con-
dition without which no reality is conceivable. It is the knowledge side of the 
universe, more than being a light source for apprehending sensations. The 
Chandogya Upanishad expounds four states of consciousness—waking, dream, 
deep sleep and turia (illumined), the most desirable one being the last one. 
When the mind withdraws itself from participation in sensory processes by 
deliberate intent and empties itself of all content, it would be the illumined 
3 It may be interesting to note that the term Buddhist Psychology was ﬁ  rst used in the 
translation of Buddhist texts by British Indologists. Goleman expressed it as follows, “It was 
news that Buddhism—like many of the world’s great spiritual traditions—harbored a theory 
of mind and its workings” (2004, p. 72).
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 139
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
state of consciousness. When this happens there arises unmediated direct 
knowledge, characterising knowing by being. It involves identity with existence 
and its knowledge. As the Upanishadic saying goes, “to know Brahman is 
to be Brahman” (The Mundaka Upanishad III 3.2.9). Buddhism refers to 
the stream of consciousness as the basis of subjective feeling of continuity 
and identity which affects our perceptions, thoughts, actions and emotions. 
While formulating ﬁ ve modes of knowing in Buddhism the focus has been 
on inner transformation, with the ultimate goal being liberation (Premasiri, 
2008). The ﬁ ve modes of knowing are: sensory, extra-sensory, holistic, in-
sightful and ethical. According to Buddhism, the knowing should not be 
based on authority, faith, belief or speculation, but on personal experience. 
Sensory experiences leading to phenomenal awareness are intentional, 
i.e., they are of objects. Distortions in this case are due to active interference 
of mind and body, which limits our awareness, and obscures our know-
ledge and feelings. The goal of life is to attain a state of pure consciousness 
where knowledge is direct, immediate and intuitive, and not mediated 
by sensory inputs. Human consciousness is considered hierarchical, the 
highest state being that of truth, pure consciousness and bliss ( Sat, Chit 
and Anand). Yoga and meditation are the processes for movement towards 
this transcendental state of pure consciousness. The engagement with pure 
consciousness makes IP transcendental in its orientation. T ranscendence is a 
movement from mundane to sublime, from sensory to intuitive and from self 
(ego) to Self (enlightened). It is a psychological process of rising from narrow, 
personal reference of a problem that causes suffering to a transpersonal, holistic 
understanding, wherein the problem loses its sting. The transcendental view 
implies a position of self (ego)—decentring and taking into consideration 
the whole range of progression in past, present and future. It draws attention 
to non-egoistic and non-body centred encompassing vision of life and its 
processes. It enlarges or expands one’s identity to incorporate others or 
anything or everything that exists (Self or all encompassing Brahman!). 
The Upanishadic Mahavakyas (great sentences) like Aham Brahmasmi (I am 
Brahman) or Sarvam khalvidam Brahman  (Everything is only Brahman) 
emphasise the value of ever expanding and inclusive identity. It sets the 
stage of an evolutionary journey in which the division of self and other or 
I/Me and you/they becomes meaningless as there is no other except one single 
I or Brahman. T ranscendence, therefore, transforms the person in totality and 
engages in a sincere seeking of higher order truth. T ranscendence and state of 
pure consciousness are held as attainable experiential realities, giving one a 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
140 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
sense of freedom and liberation. Both transcendence and spirituality are as-
pects of the same reality and share this common pursuit. Spirituality furthers 
development of comprehensive theories of human existence to understand 
creativity, intuitive thinking and extraordinary achievements (Bhawuk, 
2003). Spirituality however goes with the sacred and divine, as Indian 
thought does not maintain any dichotomy between science and spirituality. 
They are grounded in the experiences of many and are attainable for anyone 
who follows systematic procedures and practices. Though transcendence 
and spirituality are at the core of most of the Indian theories, these are not 
bound by any particular faith or ism, and serve to provide a secular account 
of human nature. 
IP is based on veridical methods. It should be clear that as a human science 
of consciousness its methods are ought to be different from the methods of 
natural/physical/material sciences. This, however, does not make it a less 
stringent science. Methods of observation and experimentation have also 
evolved to study the inner functioning of a person. In these methods of self-
observation, no distinction is made between experience and observation, 
where true knowledge is not considered as abstract and impersonal but as 
realisation of one’s being (Rao, 2008). There are methods of direct observation 
(e.g., intuition) in contrast to methods that rely on sensory and mental 
mediation. These methods rely on the blending of ﬁ rst person and second 
person perspectives (collective). Taken together, these two perspectives 
allow personal, subjective and non-relational veriﬁ  cation and in-group 
inter-subjective validity. These methods work well within Guru (second 
person)–Shisya or pupil (ﬁ rst person) methodologies. 
Needless to say the methods of Yoga and meditation have been used for 
centuries to test, experiment and experiential validation of the higher mental 
states. The various systems of yoga in India have developed rigorous and 
effective methods of enquiry in the domains of consciousness studies and 
psychology that may help us to ﬁ  nd answers to our deepest questions re-
garding values, truth, love, meaning and beauty. They can offer to modern 
science not only a wealth of philosophical and psychological theories, but 
also a rich store of practical techniques to raise our individual and collective 
levels of consciousness.
It is relevant to mention here that in the Indian tradition a distinction is 
made between para¯ vidya  (knowledge of the Self) and a-para¯ vidya  (empirical 
knowledge). A-para¯ vidya  constitutes the knowledge of social-physical world 
we live in and includes science and technology. This knowledge is also 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 141
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
relevant to the problems and challenges of the world we live in. The methods 
of knowing in the empirical world ( prama¯na ) are diverse and treat mind 
(ma¯nas  or antahkaran) as one sensory channel, which allows the understanding 
of pleasure and pain. They include methods such as perception (pratyksha), 
inference ( anuma¯na ), comparison ( upama¯na ), verbal testimony ( sabda), 
attribution of meaning (arthapatti) and historicity (aitihya). The system of 
Vedanta proposes methods of sravana, manana and nididhya¯sana,  which 
correspond to sense-based knowledge, intellect-based knowledge and intuitive 
knowledge, respectively (Rao, 2008).
IP is applied in its nature and objectives. It is not just concerned about 
testing theoretical positions or engaging in speculative metaphysical inquiry. 
It raises important questions about the ideal state of being and deals with the 
methods one can follow to attain that state. It discusses the practices through 
which people can transform their own lives to attain perfection, and thereby 
change the world they live in. The goal of IP is to help a person move from a 
conditioned state (mechanical and habitual thinking and responding) to an 
unconditioned state of freedom and liberation. This transformation, in more 
mundane terms, implies becoming more objective, discretionary, equipoise 
and aware about the potential sources of distortion. IP extensively deals with 
the ways of handling human suffering and leads one on a path of growth, 
which does not create any hurdle for other co-travellers. The techniques of 
yoga and meditation have contributed signiﬁ cantly towards self control of 
mind and feelings. Such techniques are diverse to suit people of various ori-
entations. Thus, Bhakti (devotion), Karma (action) or Jnana (knowledge lead-
ing to renunciation) yoga can be used by any person depending upon his or 
her temperament or dispositional orientation (svabha¯va ) (see Bhawuk’s article 
on methodology in this issue). The theories and practices of A¯yurveda are 
ﬁ ne examples of how the mundane can be blended with the transcendental. 
The plurality in constitution, action and context is enunciated with the help 
of the theory of trigunas of sattva, rajas and tamas.
However, it should not be misconstrued that IP is only concerned with 
inner transformation and does not deal with the mundane problems of this 
world. It has a vision of a social order in which conﬂ ict, violence, injustice 
and exploitation have no place. It offers mechanisms to address the problems 
arising from human greed, attachment and egotism, which culminate in 
poverty, injustice and pain. IP is equally concerned with the challenges of 
education, mental and physical health, and social institutions and have offered 
alternative models and methods. IP does not dismiss the empirical approach in 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
142 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
these areas but by being positioned at an appropriate level provides a broader 
perspective within which its ﬁ ndings would make sense.
What is Not the Core of Indian Psychology?
As mentioned earlier, a distinction is generally made between Indian Psychology 
(Psychology of Indian origin) and Psychology in India (academic/western 
psychology in India), though there is some overlap in the usage of these two 
terms. Part of the problem stems from the fact that in other social sciences 
such a distinction is of little consequence. For example, Indian sociology or 
Indian philosophy is same as sociology or philosophy in India. These terms 
were coined by the British scholars who were engaged in studying Indian 
society and philosophy in the later part of the eighteenth century. Moreover, 
Indian sociology and Indian Philosophy as academic disciplines have a long 
history of more than 150 years and there is no misconception about their 
subject matter. This is not so in the case of IP . Psychology in India has a history 
that spans the beginning of the last century, but in comparison IP has yet 
to re-establish itself in the academic portals. Psychological knowledge has 
a long tradition and a clear identity as an independent ﬁ  eld of inquiry. As 
mentioned earlier, though there were writings in this area for many decades, 
it has emerged as a domain of serious research in academia only in the last 
decade or so. We still do not have any critical historical document about 
the beginning and growth of IP , though we have many writings in the case 
of psychology in India.  Another reason for confusion about the usage of 
the terms is that courses on IP were introduced in many Indian universities 
(e.g., BHU, Mysore, Jodhpur, Andhra Universities) in the mid-1960s. These 
courses were primarily imported from philosophy and their subject matter 
and pedagogy were incompatible with the general ethos of psychology de-
partments, which was more tuned to laboratory research.  Courses on IP 
therefore could not survive for long and within a decade they were withdrawn 
from most of the places. Incidentally, the view still persists that IP is nothing 
but Indian Philosophy. This is yet another reason why IP is not part of the 
academic curriculum at most of the Indian universities.
In this backdrop it is quite natural to encounter many misconceptions  
about what IP stands for, or does not stand for. T o deﬁ ne IP as psychological 
knowledge rooted in Indian cultural heritage and scriptures dating back to more 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 143
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
than three millennia and relevant to the contemporary world is not enough. 
As a growing science of Indian origin, IP is often held as a conglomeration 
of several, sometimes even contradictory ﬁ elds of investigation. IP maintains 
its distinct assumptions about ontology, epistemology and content. T o arrive 
at some clarity about the subject matter of IP there is a need to engage in a 
dialogue about “what constitutes IP and what does not”. We have already 
discussed what IP is; next we propose to discuss what IP possibly is not. 
IP is Not Just a Psychology of Indian People
Due to common historical, social and cultural background, it is natural that 
Indian people share many dispositional and behavioural characteristics. On 
the very grounds, Indian people would differ from Americans, Chinese or 
any other ethnic group. Study of these cultural differences has been a very 
productive area of research in cross-cultural psychology. Being primarily a 
methodological ﬁ eld, cross-cultural psychology has taken the etic approach 
to establish equivalence of psychological phenomena for cross-cultural com-
parisons (Berry, 1989). On the other side, there is the emic approach which 
is employed when culture-speciﬁ c phenomena are investigated. Gergen et al., 
(1996, p. 501) stated, “Cross-cultural psychologists were unable to abandon 
mainstream scientism in general and remain loyal to empiricism and test 
western theories with ‘culturally’ (i.e., geographically) diverse data.” 
Both cross-cultural psychology and cultural psychology have examined 
how Indian people differ from other cultural groups. The ﬁ ndings are often 
empirical generalisations and tend to make sweeping statements about the 
populations under investigation. Given India’s vast ethnic diversity, these 
studies often fail to unravel enduring patterns and differences. Such research 
often ends up creating stereotypes about cultural groups. A good example is 
the debate about collectivism–individualism, in which countries are put in 
these two dichotomous categories (T riandis, 1984). As J.B.P . Sinha (2000b) 
has argued individualism–collectivism is a matter of sampling situations or 
persons and involves co-existing orientations (Sinha & T ripathi, 1994). In 
the absence of theoretical advancement and cultural constructs to interpret 
the results, such ﬁ ndings often remain tentative. Making such comparisons 
and cataloguing psycho-social, emotional and dispositional characteristics 
of the Indian people have been attempted in many studies. Kakar’s work on 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
144 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
Indian psyche (Kakar, 1996; Kakar & Kakar, 2007) is a case in point in which 
the psychoanalytic framework has been used to interpret the ﬁ ndings. Such 
studies are at best tentative—interpretable only within a space–time matrix. 
On the other hand, IP endeavours to identify enduring human attributes 
and help people discover their essential nature and their relationship with 
the transcendental. IP strives to unravel a-temporal and trans-cultural models 
of human ontology. 
IP is Not Indigenous Psychology
D. Sinha (1996) has reminded us about two types of indigenisation. The 
ﬁ rst is an outcome of adaptation of the mainstream (Western) psychology 
to a different cultural setup. This adaptation is along the lines argued by 
John Adair (1989). A large body of research in India can be included in this 
kind of indigenisation in which cultural concepts and practices are examined 
employing Western theories and approaches. A large number of Western 
tests of personality, intelligence, motives, values, health and well being are 
indigenised taking this approach. Such indigenisation is likely to continue 
in a global world where there is a constant ﬂ  ow of models and concepts 
across cultures, particularly from the west. The other kind of indigenisation 
is that which is based on a systematic analysis of culture-bound concepts and 
categories. Such indigenisation focuses on the contemporary relevance of 
cultural heritage and native theories which comes within the rubric of “IP”. 
Misra and Mohanty’s volume (2002) Perspectives on Indigenous Psychology 
includes Indian research that belongs to both the categories. Srivastava 
and Misra (2007) have undertaken the study of intelligence which is an 
example of the second kind of indigenisation. They use multiple sources, i.e., 
traditional texts, popular idioms and lay people’s understanding and usage to 
develop a new model of intelligence. Indigenous psychology, in this sense, is 
synonymous to folk psychology, a disciplinary knowledge that has evolved 
in a particular societal context, which is used by lay people to organise the 
conduct of their lives.
Many psychologists believe that “ Indigenous psychologies” is a more apt 
term in this context. The plural term takes in its fold tribal, subaltern and 
other communities that differ in their history, beliefs and social practices. 
Indigenous psychologies offer models and theories that can enrich our 
understanding of human psychology across cultures. Not acknowledging it 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 145
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
is akin to conceding to the position of Western psychologists that only they 
are developing universal theories, others are special cases of their theories. 
IP is more than such indigenous (or folk) psychologies for the reason that 
it offers psychological models and theories, derived from classical Indian 
thought, that hold promise of panhuman interest.
IP is Not Faith Psychology
It is argued that science builds on doubting and questioning. It is part of 
the training of a scientist to be a skeptic and question the veracity of the 
existing ﬁ ndings, i.e., not to accept anything unless it is empirically tested. 
Faith has no place in scientiﬁ c diction, “when you observe you trust”. IP 
takes a position that its reverse is also true: “when you trust you observe”. 
For example, when you trust that there is an observer ( purusha) inside you 
who is watching everything you tend to experience it. Similar is the case of 
the sixth sense; when you believe in its existence, then you notice it. This is 
how faith works. 
It can be argued that all scientiﬁ c theories have some basic assumptions 
at the core. There is no inquiry that is not based on some assumptions. 
Western science (psychology in particular) has also built on a long tradition of 
socio-religious beliefs and practices. These assumptions are never questioned 
but without understanding them many theories would make no sense. For 
example, hedonism (that man seeks pleasure and avoids pain) is at the core of 
many social learning theories. Any assumptions can be held as a statement of 
faith and the two terms have the same connotation for research. Assumptions 
lead to metaphors, which determine the methodology to be employed and 
conclusions to be drawn. The behaviouristic psychology considered man as a 
machine, which suited its mechanistic models of learning and behaviour. The 
metaphor of the “man as computer” changed the concerns and methodology 
of research, taking the human being as information processor. Similarly, the 
“man as soul” metaphor holds human being as capable of rising above their 
physical limitations and attaining their transcendental state. Within this 
framework, the Bhagavad-Gita propositions based on this metaphor in IP 
should be testable and experientially veriﬁ able. The “Man as soul” metaphor 
calls for a different ontological and epistemological position in formulation of 
research questions but it certainly does not render IP as faith psychology. 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
146 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
IP is Not Otherworldly
IP is not obsessed with otherworldly matters as it is often misunderstood. It 
does transcend the boundaries of the mundane and does not draw a rigid line 
between the physical and metaphysical. But still the life after life is not the 
subject matter of IP , nor is it a discourse on metaphysics. The primary focus 
is on how people can lead a purposeful and wholesome life. Both para¯-vidya¯  
(knowledge of the Self) and a-para¯ vidya¯ (empirical knowledge) are considered 
necessary to live a harmonious life in this world. Even transcendence, which 
is often taken in an otherworldly sense, has worldly aspects. In mundane 
terms, it signiﬁ es transformation of an individual such that one is able to 
know the truth, become objective by freeing oneself from biases and mental 
conditioning. In this sense, transcendence implies overcoming the existential 
constraints of one’s mind–body complex (Rao, 2008). It is always considered 
possible to attain the highest state of consciousness (turia¯ ) in this life itself.
Self-growth is a major objective of IP but not in an otherworldly sense. IP 
deals with existential issues here and now even though it sees the relevance 
of the past experience for the present condition and the consequences of 
the present situation for the future, keeping open all possibilities without 
foreclosing any in haste. IP recognises that physical processes inﬂ  uence 
mental functions, but it also stresses that mental functions inﬂ uence bodily 
processes. It emphasises the integral connection between consciousness, mind 
and body. Therefore, neurophysiological studies are not considered irrelevant 
to IP , but are regarded as insufﬁ cient to give us a complete understanding 
of human nature.
IP is Not a Prescriptive Science
All social and psychological theories are shaped by the cultural ﬁ rmament. 
The values, priorities and ethics of that culture provide the ingredients on 
which these theories are built and sustained. No social science can thus be 
prescription-free. Many of these prescriptions could be implicit in hypotheses, 
designs and interpretations of the ﬁ  ndings. For example, an innocuous 
experiment of Asch (1951) on social conformity in which the effect of peer 
pressure upon modiﬁ cation and distortion of judgement on a perceptual task 
was studied. Asch demonstrated that when there is group pressure (other 
members are deliberately making wrong judgements) the subject tends to 
make distorted judgements. His work apart from demonstrating social 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 147
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
conformity has a clear message that conformity is bad as it results in wrong 
judgements. Western theories are the product of a value system of individu-
alism, capitalism and materialism as IP is a product of Indian value system 
of idealising another social order. IP which grew in a different historical 
and cultural context is also a prescriptive science, having a vision of an ideal 
society and an ideal person. Accordingly, the methods that are developed 
are also designed to attain that desirable state. Keeping that in view, IP is 
sacred and spiritual, yet endorses a secular cultural ethos that highly values 
a transcendental state of being. The goal of Indian self-psychology is to 
examine one’s state of consciousness and understand the metamorphosis 
that one goes through.
Notwithstanding, IP is as descriptive and conﬁ rmatory as any other social 
science could be, it has evolved a well laid out methodology to test and 
describe human conditions and conditioning. It has sophisticated theories 
of mind and consciousness that are based on intersubjective validations. 
The process of understanding the reality, which is not mediated by sensory 
inputs or the conditioned mind, gives rise to the ultimate knowledge. 
This knowledge transcends, according to IP , the prescriptive–descriptive 
dichotomy, as well as all language barriers, as one understands the truth at a 
direct intuitive and experiential level. 
IP is Not Just a Study of Ancient Wisdom
IP is not merely a historical documentation of the ancient Indian wisdom. 
Scriptures dating back thousands of years are, of course, a vast treasure-
house of wisdom that has remained hidden and inaccessible to academic 
psychology. As academic psychology in India has begun to explore this 
symbolic and conceptual resource, it has opened up varied possibilities of 
exciting research propositions. It may be relevant to add in this context that 
this ancient knowledge has been extended, elaborated, even questioned in the 
long history. Thinkers and sages of modern times have added and commented 
on what we know from Vedas, Upanishads and different schools of thought. 
Sri Aurobindo, Ramakrishna, Krishnamurthi, Gandhi are names of a few 
modern thinkers who have vastly contributed to this ancient wisdom and 
have been able to present it in a language, which we understand. 
IP is not revivalist, if revivalism means reassertion of the ancient order 
in the present world. It cannot be an exercise to reconﬁ rm the theories pro-
pounded in the ancient texts through scientiﬁ  c methodology, nor does it 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
148 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
aim to establish its superiority over other knowledge systems. The challenge 
before IP is to carve out the core of this ancient wisdom and develop test-
able propositions. The study of ancient human science is not merely an 
academic exercise but it aims to transform self and build a happy, healthy and 
harmonious social order. IP is part of a movement toward contemporising 
Indian theories and testing their relevance for enhancing human competencies 
and well being. It is the a-temporal nature of IP and its proximity to our 
essential human nature across ages and geographies that sustain its appeal 
in the modern times. 
IP is Not a Distinct Branch of Psychology
It may be posited here that IP does not aspire to be a distinct branch of 
psychology, like social, personality, clinical and the like. Conﬁ  ning IP to 
a speciﬁ c content domain will do injustice to its vast potential and may 
deprive psychology of its diversity and richness. IP covers the whole range 
of human possibilities and, therefore, as a school of thought has relevance 
for all branches of psychology. It creates new possibilities of looking at 
the age-old human problems of social conﬂ icts and violence, emotional and 
mental health, human greed and need for individual growth. 
Should IP be bracketed with other cultural psychologies, like Chicano 
Psychology, Chinese Psychology, African Psychology, Filipino Psychology, 
etc.? It may eventually put it in an absurd situation in which there are a 
plethora of psychologies competing with each other for recognition. As 
discussed earlier, IP is not conceived as the psychology of Indian people, 
as many other cultural psychologies are. Second, IP spills over to all other 
branches of psychology and as a holistic ﬁ eld covers the entire psychology 
tree, be it health, social, mental health, organisational or any other branch. 
It is concern about human growth and welfare to which other psychologies 
can equally contribute.
Summary and Conclusion
IP is as old as the Indian civilisation but its history as a modern discipline is 
also as old as that of the Western psychology in India. The new beginning 
of IP in the modern times can be traced in the work of Swami Vivekananda, 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 149
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
Ramana Maharishi and Sri Aurobindo in the early part of the last century. 
Subsequently, the monumental work of Jadunath Sinha (1958) on IP , a 
compilation of psychological concepts and theories in scriptures and other 
ancient texts, laid its ﬁ rm foundation. However, it took much longer time 
for IP research to build up. It is only in the last decade or so that research in 
this area has picked up momentum and many important publications have 
come out. Looking at the plethora of research and publication activities going 
on at present, it is likely that IP will have a critical mass sooner than later. As 
discussed earlier, it is a misnomer that Western psychology is universal and IP 
is not. IP is neither competing nor striving to replace Western psychology as 
universal science. It only intends to offer an alternative perspective. Whereas 
Western science has focused on the human problematic, IP primarily looks at 
the growth aspects, i.e., on how human beings can actualise their full potential 
and can free themselves from their mental conditioning. In this sense, Western 
psychology and IP can complement each other by bringing into the fold of 
research a whole range of human possibilities. It is in this respect that IP 
claims its legitimate place in a truly global mainstream psychology. 
However, despite all possibilities and provocations, IP is still struggling 
to make inroads into the academic citadels of Indian universities. There are 
hardly a few places where courses on IP are being taught, and there is still a 
good deal of resistance to the introduction of IP into teaching programmes. 
Ostensibly, a larger body of Indian psychologists is still wary of the nature 
and agenda of IP . There are wide ranges of apprehensions which have stalled 
the acceptance of a psychology of Indian origin. Some such misconceptions 
are brieﬂ y noted here. 
First, Indian theories of mind and consciousness are often held to be 
subjective and not amenable to scientiﬁ c testing. Consequently, IP is con-
sidered as not amenable to empirical research using the established scientiﬁ c 
methodology. As such, IP is considered a regressive step, which may reduce 
the science of psychology to a non-scientiﬁ c enterprise. Second, the bulk of 
Indian psychologists are concerned about keeping pace with advancements 
in empirical research methodology and statistical techniques, which give psy-
chology the status of a highly sophisticated scientiﬁ  c enterprise among all 
social sciences. Indian psychologists are trained in positivistic methods and are 
more at ease in employing them. Third, scientiﬁ cally minded psychologists 
still consider IP as part of a religious (worse, revivalist) movement. Many are 
of the view that the subject matter of IP is esoteric, mystical and metaphysical. 
Therefore, there is an anxiety that including IP in the academic curriculum 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
150 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
would undermine the secular credentials of their scientiﬁ  c pursuits; that 
such a move may offend the sensibilities of the scientists of other faiths. 
Fourth, working within the domain of IP will cut them off from the rest of 
the world and may label them as being parochial or ethnocentric. This may 
deprive their research wider trans-national recognition and may foreclose 
the possibilities of international collaboration and support. In fact, many 
yoga research institutes like SVYASA, Bangalore, are getting international 
attention on par with the best research institutes in the world. Lastly, there 
is a practical reason for sticking to Western psychology in academia. There 
is no tangible incentive to the academic community to change their areas of 
specialisation. It may be more rewarding to do research, for example, in the 
area of emotional intelligence than, say, detachment. IP requires sustained 
efforts to re-educate themselves, which is hard without peer support, reading 
material and training programmes. Nandy (1995) has argued that conducting 
experiments, developing and adapting psychological tests, mindlessly 
replicating Western research is what has kept Indian psychologists occupied 
without any clarity of purpose. These Indian psychologists are often aware 
that the psychology they are pursuing does not address the real issues of 
change and development, both at social and individual level. They know 
that no in-depth analysis of the socio-psychological problems of Indian 
society will yield from this endeavour. A discontentment is brewing among 
the psychology fraternity about the state of psychology in India. An urgent 
need is felt to reorchestrate the processes of teaching, training and research 
in psychology with an open mind and cultural sensibility.
Despite all resistance and setbacks, the IP movement seems to be gathering 
momentum if attendance at IP conferences, workshops and research pub-
lications is taken as an index. There is a good deal of excitement and sense 
of purpose in the section of psychologists who are pursuing IP . It can be 
easily discerned that this newly emerging science of IP calls for a paradigm 
shift. We need a serious and sustained debate on nature, characteristics 
and implication of this new paradigm. A dominant view is that the Western 
and the Indian paradigms are irreconcilable and cannot have a meeting 
ground. Indian concepts and theories are grounded in different notions of the 
human nature, epistemology, values and world view, than the Western ones. 
However, the range of problems suggests the need for both the paradigms. 
Whereas the methodology of Western psychology focuses on the study of 
the “other” person, IP (as other Eastern psychologies) focuses on the study of 
one’s “own-self”. We need both ﬁ rst person and third person approaches to 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 151
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
bring about the desired changes in human condition. IP’s experiential basis of 
knowledge generation is common to the theories and practices of many other 
Eastern philosophies, including Zen, Tao and Buddhism. The proponents 
of this position hold that building a more harmonious and conﬂ  ict-free 
world order where people are able to actualise their inner potential can be a 
valid goal. It is hoped that turning towards IP would help the discipline by 
expanding the scope of psychological inquiry and offering technologies for 
self-transformation leading to a better quality of life. 
REFERENCES
Adair, J.G. (1989). Indigenous developments in Indian psychology: A quantitative assessment.  
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Canadian Psychological Association, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia.
American Psychologist (January 2004). Special issue on Health and Spirituality/Religion.
Anand, J. (2004). Working through emotional pain: A narrative study of the healing process. 
Psychological Studies, 49, 185–192.
Anand, J. (2006). T oward a conceptual formulation of psychological healing. Psychological 
Studies, 51(2), 119–125.
Asch, S.E. (1951). Effect of group pressure upon the modiﬁ cation and distortion of judgment. 
In H. Guetzkow (Ed.), Groups, leadership and men. Pittsburgh: Carnegie. 
Basham, A.L. (1954). The wonder that was India. New York: Grove Press. 
Berry, J.W . (1989). Imposed etics-emics-derived etics: The operationalization of a compelling 
idea. International Journal of Psychology, 24, 721–735. 
Bhawuk, D.P .S. (1999). Who attains peace: An Indian Model of Personal Harmony. Indian 
Psychological Review, 52(2 & 3), 40–48.
Bhawuk, D.P .S. (2003). Culture’s inﬂ uence on creativity: The case of Indian spirituality. 
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 27(1), 1–22.
Bhawuk, D.P .S. (2005). A model of self, work, and spirituality from the Bhagavad-Gita: 
Implications for self-efﬁ cacy, goal setting, and global psychology. In K. Ramakrishna Rao 
and Sonali B. Marwaha (Eds), T oward a spiritual psychology: Essays in Indian psychology 
(pp. 41–71). New Delhi, India: Samvad India Foundation.
Bhawuk, D.P .S. (2008a) Anchoring cognition, emotion, and behaviour in desire: A model from 
the Bhagavad-Gita. In K.R. Rao, A.C. Paranjpe, & A.K. Dalal (Eds), Handbook of Indian 
Psychology (pp. 390–413). New Delhi, India: Cambridge University Press.
Bhawuk, D.P .S. (2008b). Science of culture and culture of science: Worldview and choice of 
conceptual models and methodology. The social engineer, 11(2), 26–43.
Bondurant, J.V . (1965). Conquest of violence: The Gandhian philosophy of conﬂ  ict. Berkeley 
and Los Angles: University of California Press.
Chakraborty, S.K. (1995). Ethics in management: Vedantic perspectives . Delhi: Oxford 
University Press.
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
152 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
Cornelissen, M.  (2002). Pondicherry Manifesto of psychology. Psychological Studies, 47 , 
168–169.
Cornelissen, M. (2003). Indian psychology series–vol. 2: A short note to initiate the discussion. 
Indian Psychology Book Meeting held at the Park, Visakhapatnam from 7 to 8 December 
2003. 
Cornelissen, M. (2004). The farther reaches of human identity an exploration based on the 
work of Sri Aurobindo. Psychological Studies, 50, 226–232. 
Dalal, A.K. (1996). A science in search of its identity: T wentieth Century psychology in India. 
Indian Psychological Abstracts and Reviews, 4, 1–41.
Dalal, A.K. (2002). Psychology in India: A historical introduction. In G. Misra & A.K. Mohanty 
(Eds), Perspectives on indigenous psychology (pp. 79–107). New Delhi: Concept.
Dalal, A.K., & Misra, G. (2006). Psychology of health and well-being: Some emerging 
perspectives. Psychological Studies, 51(2–3), 91–104.
Dalal, A.S. (2000). Greater Psychology. Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram.
Davids, C.A.F .R. (1936/1978). The birth of Indian psychology and its development in Buddhism. 
Munshiram Manoharlal Publications, reprint Oriental Books. 
Derrida, J. (1982). Margins of philosophy. (A. Boss, T rans.). Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Dharampal. (2000). The Beautiful Tree: Indigenous Indian education in the Eighteenth Century. 
Mapusa: The Other India Press.
Doi, T . (1973). The anatomy of dependence. T okyo: Kodansha International.
Foucault, M. (1977). The archaeology of knowledge. London: Tavistock.
Gergen, K.J. (1989). Social psychology and the wrong revolution. European Journal of Social 
Psychology, 19, 463–484. 
Gergen, K.J. (2007). An invitation to social construction. London: SAGE Publications.
Gergen, K.J. (2009). Relational being. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Gergen, K.J., Gulerce, A., Lock, A., & Misra, G. (1996). Psychological science in cultural 
context. American Psychologist, 51, 496–503.
Goleman, D. (2004). Destructive Emotions: A Scientiﬁ c Dialogue with the Dalai Lama . NY: 
Bantam Dell.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International dif ferences in work-related values. 
Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE Publications.
Horsburgh, H.J.N. (1968). Non-violence and aggression: A study of Gandhi’s moral equivalent 
of war. London: Oxford University Press.
Jain, U. (2002). An Indian perspective on emotions. In  G. Misra & A.K. Mohanty (Eds), 
Perspectives on Indian psychology (pp. 281–291). New Delhi: Concept.
Joshi K., & Cornellisen, M. (2004). Consciousness, Indian psychology and yoga. New Delhi: 
Centre for Studies in Civilizations. 
Kakar, S. (1996). The Indian psyche. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Kakar, S., & Kakar, K. (2007). The Indians: Portrait of a people. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
Krishnan, L. (2005). Concepts of social behavior in India: Daan and distributive justice. 
Psychological Studies, 50(1), 21–31. 
Kumar, S.K.K. (2004). Perspectives on well-being in the Indian tradition. Journal of Indian 
Psychology, 22(2), 18–31.
Kumar, S.K.K. (2008). Indian thought and tradition: A psycho-historical perspective. In 
K.R. Rao, A.C. Paranjpe & A.K. Dalal (Eds), Handbook of Indian Psychology (pp. 19–52). 
New Delhi: Cambridge University Press.
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 153
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
Kuppuswami, B. (1985). Elements of ancient Indian psychology . New Delhi: Vikas Publishing 
House. 
Macaulay, T .B. (1835/1972). Minute on Indian education. In T .B. Macaulay, Selected writings 
(pp. 237–251). J. Clive & T . Pinney (Eds). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (Original 
“minute” presented in 1835). 
McClelland, D.C. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton: Van Nostrand.
Menon, S. (2005). What is Indian psychology: T ranscendence in and while thinking. Journal 
of Transpersonal psychology, 37(2), 83–89.
Misra G. (2004). Emotion in modern psychology and Indian thought. In Kirit Joshi & 
Matthijs Cornellissen (Eds), Consciousness, science society and yoga. New Delhi: Centre 
for the Studies of Civilization.
Misra, G. (2005). The science of affect: Some Indian insights. In K. Ramakrishna Rao & 
Sonali Bhatt-Marwah (Eds), T owards a spiritual Psychology: Essays in Indian psychology 
(pp. 229–248). New Delhi: Samvad India Foundation.
Misra, G. (2007). Psychology and societal development: Paradigmatic and social concerns. 
New Delhi: Concept.
Misra, G., & Gergen, K.J. (1993). On the place of culture in psychological science. International 
Journal of Psychology, 28, 225–243.
Misra, G., & Kumar, (in press). Psychology in India: retrospect and prospect. In G. Misra (Ed.), 
Psychology in India: advances in research vol. 4. New Delhi: Pearson Education. 
Misra, G., & Mohanty, A. (Eds). (2002). Perspectives on indigenous psychology . New Delhi: 
Concept.
Misra, G., Prakash, A., & Varma, S. (1999). Psychology in India: Perceptions and perspectives. 
Psychology and Developing Societies, 11, 25–53.
Misra, G., & T ripathi, K.N. (2004). Psychological dimensions of poverty and deprivation. 
In J. Pandey (Ed.), Psychology in India revisited: Development in the discipline  (Vol. 3) 
(pp. 118–215). New Delhi: SAGE Publications. 
Nakamura, H. (1997). Ways of thinking of eastern peoples: India, China, Tibet and Japan . 
London: Kegun Paul. 
Nandy, A. (Ed.). (1988). Science, hegemony and violence: A requiem for modernity. New Delhi: 
Oxford University Press.
Nandy, A. (1995). The savage Freud: The ﬁ rst non-Western psychoanalysts and the politics 
of secret-selves in colonial India. In A. Nandy (Ed.), The Savage Freud and other essays on 
possible and retrievable selves (pp. 81–144). New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Pandey, J. (Ed.). (1988).  Psychology in India: The state-of-the art (Vols.1, 2, 3). New Delhi: 
SAGE Publications.
Pandey, J. (Ed.). (2001). Psychology in India revisited, Vol. 1. New Delhi: SAGE Publications.
Pandey, J. (Ed.). (2002). Psychology in India revisited, Vol. 2. New Delhi: SAGE Publications.
Pandey, J. (2004). Psychology in India enters the twenty-ﬁ rst century: Movement toward an 
indigenous discipline. In J. Pandey (Ed.), Psychology in India revisited: Developments in 
the discipline (vol. 3, pp. 342–370). New Delhi: SAGE Publications.
Paranjpe, A.C. (1984). Theoretical psychology: The meeting of east and west. New York: Plenum 
Press. 
Paranjpe, A.C. (1998). Self and identity in modern psychology and Indian thought . New York: 
Plenum. 
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
154 / AJIT K. DALAL and GIRISHWAR MISRA
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
Paranjpe, A.C. (2006). From tradition through colonialism to globalization: Reﬂ  ections on 
the history of psychology in India. In A.C. Brock (Ed.), Internationalizing the history of 
psychology. New York: New York University Press.
Paranjpe, A.C. (2009). In defence of an Indian approach to the psychology of emotion. 
Psychological Studies, 54(1), 3–22.
Pelton, L.H. (1974). The psychology of nonviolence. NewYork: Pergamon Press. 
Premasiri, P .D. (2008). Verities of cognition in early Buddhism. In K.R. Rao, A.C. Paranjpe 
& A.K. Dalal (Eds), Handbook of Indian Psychology (pp. 85–104). New Delhi: Cambridge 
University Press.
Radhakrishnan, S. (1953). The principal Upanishads. London: Allen & Unwind. 
Rao, K.R. (1988). What is Indian psychology? Journal of Indian Psychology, 7(1), 37–57.
Rao, K.R. (2002a). Consciousness studies: Cross-cultural perspectives. Jefferson, NC: 
McFarland.
Rao, K.R. (2002b). Consciousness studies: A survey of perspectives and research. In J. Pandey 
(Ed.), Psychology in India revisited, Vol. 2 (pp. 19–162). New Delhi: SAGE Publications.
Rao, K.R. (2008). Prologue: Introducing Indian psychology. In K.R. Rao, A.C. Paranjpe & 
A.K. Dalal (Eds), Handbook of Indian Psychology (pp. 1–18). New Delhi: Cambridge 
University Press.
Rao, K.R., & Marwaha, S.B. (Eds). (2005). T owards a spiritual psychology: Essays on Indian 
psychology. New Delhi: Samvad Indian Foundation.
Rao, K.R., Paranjpe, A.C., & Dalal, A.K. (Eds). (2008). Handbook of Indian Psychology . 
New Delhi: Cambridge University Press.
Rao, R. (1962). Development of psychological thought in India. Mysore: Kavyalaya. 
Safaya, R. (1975). Indian psychology: A critical and historical analysis of psychological speculation 
in India philosophical literature. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Saraswathi, T .S. (1999). Culture, socialization and human development: Theory, research and 
applications in India. New Delhi: SAGE Publications.
Singh-Sengupta, S. (2001). Management of power: Ascent from self to self. Social Science 
International, 17(1), 59–73.
Sinha, D. (1965). Integration of modern psychology with modern thought. In A.J. Sutchi & 
M.A. Vick (Eds), Readings in humanistic psychology . (pp. 265–279). New York: Free 
Press.
Sinha D. (1981). Non-western perspectives in psychology: Why, what and whiter? Journal of 
Indian Psychology, 3, 1–9.
Sinha, D. (1986). Psychology in a third world country: An Indian experience. New Delhi: SAGE 
Publications.
Sinha, D. (1996). Culturally rooted psychology in India: Dangers and developments. Inter-
national Journal of Psychology, 30, 99–110.
Sinha, D. (1997). Indigenizing psychology. In J.W . Berry, Y. Poortinga & J. Pandey (Eds), 
Handbook of cross-cultural psychology: Theoretical and methodological perspectives (Vol. 1). 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Sinha, D. (1998). Changing perspectives in social psychology in India: A journey towards 
indigenization. Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 1, 17–31.
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
The Core and Context of Indian Psychology / 155
Psychology and Developing Societies 22, 1 (2010): 121–155
Sinha, D., & T ripathi, R.C. (1994). Individualism in a collectivist culture: A case of coexistence 
of the opposites. In U. Kim, H.C. T riandis, C. Kagitcibasi, S.C. Choi, & G. Yoon (Eds), 
Individualism and collectivism: Theory, method and application (pp. 123–136). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Sinha, J. (1958). Indian psychology, Vol. 1 & 2. Calcutta: Jadunath Sinha Foundation.
Sinha, J.B.P . (2000a). Patterns of Work Culture: Cases and Strategies for Culture Building . 
New Delhi: SAGE Publications.
Sinha, J.B.P . (2000b). Indigenization of psychology in India. Psychological Studies, 45, 3–13. 
Snyder, C.R., & Lopez, S. (2002). Handbook of positive psychology.  New York: Academic 
Press.
Sri Aurobindo (1939/2006). The life divine. Puducherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram.
Srivastava , A.K., & Misra, G. (2003). Going beyond the model of economic man: An indi-
genous perspective on happiness. Journal of Indian Psychology, 21, 12–29.
Srivastava, A.K., & Misra, G. (2007). Rethinking intelligence: Conceptualizing human competence 
in cultural context. New Delhi: Concept.
Stanley, L. (Ed.). (1990). Feminist praxis: Research, theory and epistemology in feminist sociology. 
London: Routledge.
Swami Rama, Ballentine, R., & Ajay, S. (1976).  Yoga and psychotherapy . Honesdale, PA: 
Himalayan Institute.
Tart, C. (1975). Transpersonal psychologies. San Francisco: Harper & Row.
Tart, C. (2009). The end of materialism. Oakland, CA: Neotic Books.
Thapar, R. (2002). The Penguin History of Early India. New Delhi: Penguin.
T riandis, H.C. (1984). T oward a psychological theory of economic growth. International 
Journal of Psychology, 19, 79–96.
VandenBos, G.R. (Ed.). (1996). Outcome assessment of psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 
51(10), 17–25.
Varma, P .K. (2004). Being Indian. New Delhi: Penguin. 
Wertz, F .J. (1998). The role of the humanistic movement in the history of psychology. Journal 
of Humanistic Psychology, 38(1), 42–70.
Winternitz, M. (1927). A history of Indian literature, Vol. 1 . (S. Ketkar, T rans.). Kolkata: 
University of Calcutta Press. 
Worchel, S., & Cooper, J. (1989). Understanding social psychology . Homewood, IL: The 
Dorsey Press.
Ajit K. Dalal is Professor of Psychology at the University of Allahabad, India. He has published in the 
areas of health beliefs, psychological healing and Indian psychology. His major books are Attribution 
Theory and Research, New Directions in Indian Psychology (vol. 1) and Social Dimensions of Health 
and Handbook of Indian Psychology.
Girishwar Misra is currently Professor of Psychology at University of Delhi, India. He has under-
taken major research projects and written extensively in the areas of poverty, stress, environment, 
cultural Psychology of self and emotions, creativity, psychological theory and well-being.
 at DELHI UNIVERSITY on April 17, 2010 http://pds.sagepub.comDownloaded from