# mental-health-hindu-psych
# source PDF: raw/mental-health-hindu-psych.pdf | pages: 126 | ~80380 words (pymupdf)

Mental Health And Hindu 
Psychology 
 
By 
Swami Akhilananda 
 
 
MENTAL HEALTH AND HINDU PSYCHOLOGY FIRST PUBLISHED IN 
GREAT BRITAIN IN 1952  
PRINTED BY LITHOGRAPHY AND BOUND IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
JARROLD AND SONS LIMITED, NORWICH  
TO MY BELOVED MASTER SRIMAT SWAMI BRAHMANANDAJI MAHARAJ 
SPIRITUAL SON OF SRI RAMAKRISHNA WITH LOVING DEVOTION AND 
HUMBLE SALUTATIONS  
1950 
 

	  
2	  
Contents 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………. 3  
PREFACE ………………………………………………………………….. 4  
I Therapeutic Value of Indian Psychology ………………………………… 8  
II How to Overcome Anxiety ……………………………………………… 22  
III Conquest of Fear ……………………………………………………….. 29  
IV Conquest of Frustration ………………………………………………… 34  
V Forgiveness or Aggression ……………………………………………… 39  
VI Competition or Cooperation ……………………………………………. 46  
VII How to Overcome Conflict and Tension………………………………  54 
VIII Social Adjustment ……………………………………………………. 67  
IX Escape through Alcoholism ……………………………………………. 71  
X Power of Mind …………………………………………………………... 77  
 XI Power of Love …………………………………………………………. 83  
 XII Love, Marriage, and Religion ………………………………………… 91  
XIII Religion and Integration ……………………………………………… 100  
XIV Technique of Integration of Personality  (chapter missing)  
XV Is Religion Escapism? …………………………………………………. 105  
XVI Power through Religious Practices …………………………………… 115  
BIBLIOGRAPHY ………………………………………………………….. 124  
INDEX  (missing)  
 

	  
3	  
INTRODUCTION 
 
BY O. HOBART MOWRER 
Research Professor of Psychology, University of Illinois 
HE thesis of this book is at once new and very old. In prehistoric and even early historic 
times, problems both of the body and of the soul, or psyche, were ministered to by the same 
persons: priests, shamans, medicine men. Medicine, in the modern sense of the term, is often 
dated from developments in fifth century (B.C.) Greece which were associated with the name of 
Hippocrates but which dipped back into the earlier civilizations of Egypt, Babylonia, India, and 
China. By the end of the second century, A.D., the spotlight in medicine had shifted to  Rome, 
where its brightest star was Galen. During the Dark Ages in Europe, interest in research and 
medical inquiry was kept alive in Alexandria and a few other spots east and south of the 
Mediterranean. But at no time was medicine a serious rival of established religion, for its rationale 
was feeble and its practical results problematic.  
However, with the Renaissance, such men as Vesalius, Harvey, Lister and Leeuwenhoek appeared 
and then, in the middle of the nineteenth century came Pasteur and the germ theory of disease and 
the development of anesthesia and surgery. Since that time progress in medicine has been little 
short of miraculous. In 1850 the average life span in New England was 40 years. By 1900 it had 
risen to 47 years for the United States as a whole, and at the present time it is 67 years. What more 
eloquent tribute to medical progress. 
It is not surprising, then, that within the past century or two we have turned increasingly to 
medicine for treatment in the realm of physical disease; and it is understandable that we should also 
have looked hopefully to it for aid in dealing with "mental disease." Here, however, the results have 
been disappointing.  
Nothing comparable to the miracles of physical medicine has happened in psychological medicine, 
as is attested by the mental hospital population of this country (about 800,000) and the high 
incidence of ambulatory psychotic and severely neurotic persons. 
 To date, we can justly say that the medical approach to "mental disease" has failed. This approach 
was at first explicitly organic, as such terms as "neurosis" (an "osis" of the nerves) "neurasthenia" 
(nerve weakness), and "nervous-ness" imply. The causes of all such disorders were sought in terms 
of constitutional taint, degeneration, atrophy, tumors, germs, toxins, and so forth. In some types of 
disturbances, e.g. general paresis and pellagra psychosis, this approach succeeded brilliantly, but it 
left un touched the source of difficulty in the overwhelming majority of cases.  
At this stage, in the last decade of the nineteenth century, Sigmund Freud put forward a somewhat 
different theory that aroused new hope. He, too, had been trained as a physician, but he transcended 
his training to the extent of positing that most personality disturbances are in no way connected 
with organic factors. However much he thus departed from established medical tradition, Freud did 
not entirely escape the influence of his professional background; for the new theory of mental 
disorder which he advanced likewise had a strong biological bias. It assumed, as is now well 
known, that personality problems arise when and only when the "natural expression" of such 
impulses as lust and hostility is blocked, inhibited, frustrated. This impairment of biologically 
normal functioning comes about most typically when the efforts of parents and other socializers of 
the young succeed, Freud believed, only too well in their purposes and thereby produce adults who 
are psychologically stunted, crippled in respect to their capacity to satisfy these inherent needs and 
thus be healthy and happy.  
T 

	  
4	  
This type of thinking has enjoyed and still enjoys an enormous vogue. However, it has not given us 
either an efficient method for treating personality disorders or a new philosophy of life 01 theory of 
education which enables us to prevent them. What it has given us is a powerful research tool which 
continues to pro vide new information and understanding. Use of the psychoanalytic method in 
treatment has abundantly demonstrated the soundness of Freud's position with respect to the futility 
of symptom therapy. Symptoms, Freud held and many others have now confirmed, are but the 
habits which neurotically anxious persons develop as means of dealing with their otherwise 
intractable suffering. Freud rightly insisted that attention be turned from the symptom to the 
sufferer, to the person as such. 
Freud's next assumption, with which today there is also general agreement, was that neurotic 
suffering always involves a mystery; there is, he maintained, always something unintelligible, 
unknown, something unconscious about it. Neurotic anxiety, he said, comes about because 
something has been put "out of mind" (dissociated, repressed), and it is the periodic attempt of this 
something to return to consciousness that produces the mystifying, terrifying experience of neurotic 
anxiety. But what is this something? Freud, as we know, maintained that it was either sexuality or 
aggression. Here, it seems, Freud was in error. He did not see what now is unmistakable, namely, 
that the something which falls under repression in the neurotic is his conscience, his moral and 
ethical strivings, rather than his biologically given needs of sex and aggression. Neurosis, it now 
appears, is not the result of biological frustration but of moral frustration. Freud correctly saw that 
the prelude to neurosis is a conflict between biologically given impulses (immaturities) and social 
pressures which are internalized in the form of conscience; but because of his training as a 
physician, we conjecture, Freud mistakenly assumed that the pathogenic resolution of this conflict 
involved renunciation of impulse rather than of conscience. The correction of this error bids fair to 
bring a long overdue revitalization of psychotherapy and of the theory underlying it.  
But this development does something else. With it history comes full circle, and we see again the 
legitimacy of the concern of religious leaders in such matters. Traditionally, they, more than any 
other group, have been concerned with the problem of man's relation to others and to himself, with 
man's goodness and his happiness. They, especially, have been interested in questions of 
conscience, guilt, temptation, conflict, and anxiety. But for complex historical reasons, most 
religious leaders had, until recently, abandoned their position as psychic physicians and retired to 
the remoter realms of theology and metaphysics. Today, however, a vigorous new movement looms 
on the horizon. Recent books by Fosdick, Hiltner, May, Liebman, Sheen, and others tell the story of 
this re-awakening and point to momentous potential developments.  
Let us be more concrete. Imagine a small American town with a population of 2000 or 3000. 
Typically such a town will have five or six physicians and about the same number of churches. The 
physicians are likely to be busy, harassed men who are overworked and whose waiting rooms are 
overcrowded because of patients whose problems are primarily psychological but who know 
nowhere else to go. By contrast the churches in that town are likely to be empty six days of the 
week and only half filled on Sunday! Surely the moral is obvious. Here lies a golden opportunity 
for the churches to revitalize themselves and, at the same time, to render a significant social service.  
At the present time the relatively new and still small professions of psychiatry, social work, and 
clinical psychology are attempting to meet the needs of persons with emotional and personality 
problems. But thus far their services are mainly limited to larger cities, and even here there is a 
great discrepancy between services available and the need for them. Thousands of churches the 
country over, by contrast, offer potential facilities of great scope. Churches, unlike schools, are 
legitimately concerned not just with children but with the "whole family." Everyone, regardless of 
age, may "go to church." Moreover, the church, at least in principle, is prepared to operate at both 
the broadly educational and the more specifically therapeutic levels, to deal, that is, with both 

	  
5	  
groups and individuals. Given a new type of leadership which now seems, in fact, to be emerging 
and a somewhat altered conception of the place of religion in the life of modern men and women, 
the churches are in a position to do more than any other agency or institution within our entire 
society to influence our common culture along lines of mental hygiene and social reconstruction.  
But the realization of this objective will not be easy. The modern mind is in no mood for 
metaphysical makeshift; its problems must be met scientifically, rationally, honestly. And it will 
take time before religious leadership can make the internal accommodations and reorientation 
which are necessary if present opportunities are to be seized and effectively utilized.  
The present volume by Swami Akhilananda presents what will be for most Americans new and 
certainly important facts and perceptions in this field of endeavor. To Swami Akhilananda the 
separation of religion and clinical psychology in this country must, in the beginning of his long 
sojourn here, have been an arresting spectacle; for in Hinduism, psychology and religion are one 
and inseparable. Certainly this old and great system of thought has valuable insights and 
suggestions to contribute to the resolution of our particular problems in a creative and constructive 
way. More than this, the author is an accomplished scholar, not only in the field of classical religion 
(see his Hindu View of Christ), but also in respect to the theories and theoretical dilemmas of 
contemporary psychiatry, psychology, and sociology (cf. Hindu Psychology). He knows the 
meaning of anxiety in both its normal and neurotic sense, and he sees clearly the paradoxes and 
inadequacies of Freudian psychoanalysis. But, most of all, Swami Akhilananda is a refined, 
sensitive, tolerant human being whose wisdom and kindliness have already touched the lives of 
innumerable persons and will, in the present volume, bring new understanding and a surer 
perspective to many more.  
 
PREFACE 
IN A casual way one day, our good friend Dr. Gordon W. Allport noted the subjects of our lectures 
in Boston and said: "Swami, these should form a book." Until that day, we had no notion of writing 
a book on mental health and integration of personality. So it was he who was really responsible for 
stimulating the idea of getting together a number of lectures and putting them into book form. 
Again, we hold him responsible because of his interest in the progress of this humble contribution 
to the field of mental health.  
Pioneering work in mental health was started towards the end of the eighteenth century by a great 
French physician, Dr. Pinel, whose departure from the old inhuman treatment of mental patients 
was inspired by his sympathy for them. A number of English, French, and German physicians 
followed the lead of Pinel in dealing with the insane. More systematic study of psychotherapy was 
started gradually in the West by such thinkers as Charcot, Janet, Kraepelin, Bleuler, and Freud 
during the eighties of the last century. Many outstanding individuals in the West have become 
interested in mental health. Since the first World War, serious consideration has been given to 
methods of psychotherapy. It seems that the mental health of a majority of the people is seriously 
affected; consequently, they are developing what are known as psychosomatic diseases and neurotic 
and psychotic behavior. It has been established by general physicians, psychiatrists, and clinical 
psychologists that a majority of physical disturbances are psychogenic. So not only medical 
specialists but also philosophers, scientists, and rationalistic thinkers of all types are deeply 
interested in methods for stabilizing the mind.  
The Hindus started their psychological research on the basis of their spiritual experiences. Certain 
methods are necessary for the attainment of what they call Samadhi (super consciousness). We have 
already discussed the various aspects of the psychology of the Hindus in another book, Hindu 
Psychology. Even though their primary interest is in religious development, they fully realize that 

	  
6	  
until and unless the mind is wholly unified and integrated there is no possibility of spiritual 
realization or mystical experiences. Herein lies the utility of the contributions of the Hindus to the 
field of mental health. The technique of their spiritual realization is based on what they term 
paramārtha or the supreme goal of life, which is the fundamental principle in stabilizing the mind. 
Mental health is the prerequisite of spiritual discipline. So long as the mind is disturbed and agitated 
by conflicting emotions and consequent tension, there is no peace of mind; and when there is no 
peace of mind there is no joy in life. Neither can a restless mind have the possibility for realizing 
the ultimate truth. The mind is the instrument of perception. So long as it is unsteady and unstable, 
we cannot correctly perceive a thing. When we think of the ultimate truth which is beyond the pale 
of ordinary experiences, we require mental development which is stronger than ordinary mental 
health. So it is worth while for modern Western scholars of psychotherapy to consider the 
contribution of Hindu psychology in the field of mental health at this critical juncture of Western 
civilization.  
Western psychotherapists of various schools have, of course, been trying to solve the mental 
problems of the people. Yet in spite of their attempts and noble contributions they lack something 
which can be given by the religious psychology of India for the understanding of the total 
personality and the goal of life. So we feel that understanding between Western psychotherapy of 
various types and the Indian system of mental training can become a great strength for the solution 
of mental problems and psychosomatic diseases.  
Hindu psychology includes Buddhist and Jaina systems of thought. These two schools are offshoots 
of Hindu thought. As they have functioned in India along with Hindu ideas, the three schools have 
commingled to such an extent that it is now difficult to separate their contributions. For the sake of 
convenience we are here calling the three systems of thought by the term Hindu psychology.  
Hindu religion, philosophy, and psychology are inseparably connected. Consequently, when we 
discuss the religious outlook and religious values we necessarily mean the philosophical 
background of religion and also mental training. By religion we mean neither sectarianism nor a 
dogmatic conception of any type of religious thought or method. We want to make it clear that the 
religious goal can be achieved by different persons of different mental aptitudes in different ways, 
without any particularization and overemphasis on one method or one doctrine. Nevertheless, we 
emphasize that religious values cannot be achieved without mental integration.  
The technique of mental training suggested by Hindu thinkers is of vital importance for the 
integration of the mind and for proper mental health. So we humbly offer to the Western 
psychotherapists and the general public the contributions of Hindu psychologists to consider and 
absorb into their own systems of thought.  
We beg to differ with those psychiatrists who have certain definite ideas of the predominant urge in 
man. Hindu psychologists take a broad viewpoint of the human mental states. Although they feel 
that the master urge or sentiment is the desire for abiding joy, they do not condemn or negate the 
biological urges of man. Rather, they try to subordinate them to this master urge. It will be worth 
while for Western psychiatrists and Eastern psychiatrists who are trained in the Western system to 
consider the contribution of Hindu psychologists in the field of technical training of the mind and in 
the development of the philosophy of life. With this view we present this little book.  
Because these were originally extemporaneous lectures delivered and recorded in Boston and 
Providence they may have a tendency toward repetition. Again, we have had to make this book 
comparatively free from many technicalities knowing that it will also be read by the general public. 
For this reason it may seem like preaching in some places. We hope that the readers will forgive 
these defects. As we feel it is worth while for the psychiatrists and religious counselors to see if 
they can be mutually benefited by the system of Hindu psychology, we are presenting this book in 

	  
7	  
this form. They can further study the original systems of Hindu thought. This is only meant for the 
stimulation of their research in the therapeutic contribution of Hindu psychology.  
What little we have learned to be of service to disturbed persons and to our own students and 
devotees is entirely to the credit of our beloved Master, Swami Brahmananda. We often noticed him 
and other disciples of Sri Ramakrishna showing sympathy and love to their disciples, devotees, and 
others, regardless of religious or racial affiliations. Their unbounded love has lifted many persons 
from their distressed and disturbed states. From our boyhood, we noticed the tremendous spiritual 
power of our beloved Master in lifting different persons to a higher plane of consciousness. It is he 
who really inspired us to devote our life to the service of the seekers of truth. The influence of 
Swami Premananda, another disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, in our life has contributed immensely to 
our understanding of the human mind. The teachings of Swami Vivekananda are indeed the guiding 
force in our thinking of mental and spiritual problems of modern man. So if any credit is given to 
anyone for this humble contribution, it goes to these three great personalities and to other disciples 
of Sri Ramakrishna who unceasingly loved and blessed us.  
We are grateful to Professor O. Hobart Mowrer of the University of Illinois for writing the 
Introduction. He and Professor Gordon W. Allport and Professor Edgar S. Brightman have 
stimulated us in psychological and spiritual discussions for several years.  
Our thanks go to some of the Swamis of the Ramakrishna Order of India who kindly read the 
manuscript. Our affectionate gratitude goes especially to Professor Edgar S. Brightman of Boston 
University; Professor Gordon W. Allport of Harvard University; Dr. Dana L. Farnsworth of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Dean Walter G. Muelder, Professor Paul E. Johnson, 
Professor Peter A. Bertocci, Mr. John D. Copp, and Dr. Robert P. Benedict of Boston University; 
Dr. David Wright, Superintendent of Butler Hospital; and Dr. Allen E. Claxton of New York City; 
for their reading of the manuscript and for their valuable suggestions. Dr. Ordway Tead, Chairman 
of the Board of Higher Education in New York City, and Editor of Social and Economic Books of 
Harper & Brothers, personally read the Preface six manuscript and gave valuable suggestions. We 
are greatly indebted to him for his genuine contributions to this book. We are indeed indebted to 
some of our students and friends who recorded our lectures, typed the manuscript, and helped in 
various ways. We also thankfully acknowledge the authors and publishers who very kindly 
permitted us to quote from their books.  
The result of this humble offering goes to the all-loving Being.  
 
SWAMI AKHILANANDA  
Ramakrishna Vedanta Society  
Boston, Massachusetts  
August 15 1950  
 

	  
8	  
MENTAL HEALTH AND HINDU PSYCHOLOGY 
CHAPTER I 
Therapeutic Value of Indian Psychology 
HE modern world is deeply interested in psychosomatic diseases and their treatment. Many 
of the best medical authorities consider that there are numerous physical ailments which 
cannot be treated without an understanding of their psychological background. In fact, they 
feel that the majority of diseases are psychogenic, namely, originating in mental disturbance and 
tension, and hence they have a practical interest in psychosomatic diseases and their treatment. The 
word "psychosomatic" is a combination of "psyche" (mind) and "soma" (body), from the Greek. 
The physicians who are interested in psychosomatic medicine realize that physical diseases cannot 
be treated properly unless their causes, which are rooted in the mind, are removed or straightened 
out. According to certain statistical accounts, in America eighty per cent of the medical cases are 
psychogenic. According to other accounts, the percentage is about sixty-six. The recently retired 
Surgeon General of the United States declared that more than one half of the cases treated by 
physicians were of this type, and admitted that the number might actually be much higher than fifty 
per cent. Most of the American medical authorities, as well as psychologists, psychiatrists, and 
psychotherapists, are deeply concerned about the situation. Various other types of psychiatric 
disturbances are also attracting a great deal of attention from practitioners concerned with physical 
and mental ailments, and from religious leaders as well. It is almost certain that in the near future 
people in the Eastern countries will also be giving their attention to these problems, for their ways 
of life are changing  considerably. It is natural that people will be deeply interested in knowing how 
Indian psychology can contribute to the field of psychosomatic medicine at the present stage of 
civilization. In order to understand the contributions of Indian psychology to this field, it is essential 
that one first understand the nature of mental and psychosomatic problems. Broadly speaking, 
physical ailments can be classified into two groups. First, there are the physiogenic diseases which 
stem from the physical condition. Some of these ailments are congenital; they are either inherited or 
they are in the very makeup of the human constitution. Others are caused by bacteria of various 
types, such as tuberculosis and typhoid bacilli, and by non-filterable viruses. Sometimes physical 
ailments can arise from malnutrition (lack of the essential ingredients of the body) or from the 
deterioration of the physical constitution due to old age and other changes in the body. Climatic 
conditions create certain ailments. All of these diseases are organic. In the second group are the 
psychogenic ailments created by mental conditions which affect the nervous system. These are 
generally called "functional" by physicians. They include peptic ulcers, mucous colitis, 
hypertension (high blood pressure), certain kinds of heart symptoms, asthma, and certain other 
disorders commonly referred to as psychosomatic in nature.1 Those who use psychosomatic 
treatment declare that psychological diseases or functional ailments cannot be cured by medical 
methods alone, although in acute conditions medical help is necessary. Neurosurgery has proved to 
be beneficial in many extreme cases of acute functional trouble, such as hypertension and 
consequent heart ailment. However, no permanent cure is possible without restoring the mental 
health of the patient, even though medical care is helpful. So proper psychological understanding of 
the causes of functional disease is of vital importance in attempts to eliminate it.  
Psychiatric disturbances are classified into two groups neuroses and psychoses. Functional diseases 
are included under the neuroses. There are also cases which can be included under psychoneuroses. 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  	  A clinical study of nearly three hundred cases made in the Boston Dispensary under the supervision of Dr. Joseph 
Pratt and his colleague Dr. Golden, revealed that many of the so-called organic diseases were purely psychogenic. They 
were cured and helped through suggestion and thought training. See also Wolf and Wolfe, Human Gastric Function 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1943).  	  
T 

	  
9	  
People who suffer from psychoneuroses are not insane but they have emotional disorders, affecting 
the nerve functions, which stem from maladjustment, insecurity, inordinate ambition, anxiety, fear, 
frustration, and other tensions. Some persons have distinct behavior difficulties and show 
considerable disturbance in their personal and interpersonal relationships. Their behavior patterns 
are affected by their mental conditions; and, although they have regular activities and duties in 
human society, they are regarded as abnormal personalities because they act in an irregular and 
unusual manner and often in a way that is considered irrational. It is difficult to help neurotic 
personalities because of their tendency to cling to and repeat their behavior which serves a 
particular purpose for them. Not until functional troubles become disturbing do people seek and use 
psychotherapy. Religious psychology properly used at a sufficiently early stage could prevent the 
development of the symptoms. Hence, the contributions of Hindu psychology should be properly 
evaluated. Psychotic persons are disorganized in their mental life and human relationships. They 
may be classified as suffering from dementia praecox or schizophrenia, paranoia, manic-depressive 
psychosis, involutional melancholia, and so forth. Sometimes, symptoms identical with those which 
are evident in these diseases may be due to organic disease of the brain and nervous system, such as 
infection, tumor, or congenital defects. However, the vast majority of these cases arise from mental 
disturbances caused by maladjustments or tensions. There are behavior disorders which do not 
come under any definite category, such as exaggerated aggression, obsession, and compulsion. 
They are generally regarded as psychoneurotic because they are not wholly psychotic, yet they have 
distinct neurotic characteristics. Persons with such disorders become unpopular in society because 
of their activities, speech, and behavior, which are affected by their aggression and attitudes of 
superiority. The obsessive type of person cannot change his pattern of repetitive thinking, even 
though the ideas that come to his mind are insignificant. He makes much of petty matters; 
consequently, his behavior, mental condition, and nervous system, as well as his social adjustment 
are gradually affected. People with compulsive behavior patterns repeat their actions without any 
justification, as if they were possessed by them. Anxiety neuroses can* be included in this group of 
ailments, as they are expressed in neurotic phobias which are based on fear, panic, and the like. 
Psychoneurotic disturbances are often accompanied by definite physical symptoms like heart 
palpitation, perspiration, exhaustion, or fainting spells. There have been many instances of pain or 
other disturbances which were generally regarded as physical ailments when they were actually 
psychogenic disturbances. This does not mean that stomach ulcers, aches and pains in the teeth, 
head, shoulder, chest, stomach, legs, or other parts of the body are imaginary, but rather that they 
are often created by mental Conditions with consequent nerve disorders which lead to pain. They 
are mostly to be cured or helped by mental suggestion, training, and adjustment. Certain mental 
conditions and attitudes bring about neurotic and psychotic disturbances. It is well established that 
the early insecurity of childhood creates aggressiveness with inferiority and superiority complexes. 
In our experience with individual situations, we have observed a number of persons whose mental 
conditions were upset and whose behavior patterns were unusual because of early insecurity. A 
young man of our acquaintance lost his father when he was a small child. He was brought up in the 
house of relatives. He got everything that he wanted from them through his own demands rather 
than through their spontaneous emotional expression toward him. As a result, his behavior became 
more and more aggressive, overbearing, and full of superiority. He developed these qualities to 
compensate for his sense of inferiority and natural craving for emotional satisfaction. Not only was 
his behavior as an adult colored by his mental disturbance, but he had serious functional troubles all 
his life. Medical care has brought him no permanent help. Many such instances could be 
enumerated. Anxiety, also, arises from the sense of insecurity, which ultimately leads to numerous 
neurotic symptoms and psychotic conditions. In one case, the parents of a young boy were divorced 
and the mother married another man with whom the boy had to live. Since he experienced a good 
deal of resentment and insecurity because of the change in conditions, he developed most 
disagreeable neurotic symptoms and functional ailments. He had considerable medication, yet he 

	  
10	  
did not seem to be helped until he had religious psychotherapy to strengthen his emotional life. 
There have been innumerable persons who have developed both neurotic and psychotic symptoms 
from a sense of guilt. Consciousness of sinful activities and overemphasis on the effect of such 
activities partly or completely disorganize many personalities. A middle-aged professional man 
developed a sense of guilt because of his illegal practices. In order to escape from it he developed 
an extreme form of alcoholism. The persistent feeling of guilt haunted him so much that he had no 
alternative but to forget everything under the influence of alcohol. The Western types of 
psychoanalysis and other such therapeutic methods were tried for years and years but could not help 
him to eliminate either the cause of his mental disturbances or the alcoholism. Many persons 
develop acute alcoholism because of mental tension and frustration. There are millions of people 
who are known as alcoholics, because without alcohol they cannot go on in life. They enter a 
vicious circle, depending on alcohol for the release from tension and frustration, while this very 
habit of drinking makes them more and more emotionally disturbed. When their everyday lives and 
interpersonal relationships are seriously impeded, they again intensify their drinking to forget their 
problems. Of course, we do not include the so-called social drinkers in the category of alcoholics, 
but we are apprehensive that many of these social drinkers can and do become real alcoholics. In 
many religious groups alcoholism is regarded as sinful; however, most authorities understand it as a 
psychological ailment which ought to be treated as such. There has been a change in attitude toward 
this problem in the same way that the general attitude toward mental illness has been modified. In 
the Middle Ages in Europe, mentally disturbed persons were regarded as possessed by the devil or 
evil spirits, and they were humiliated by the treatment given them. Today, it is understood by 
psychotherapists and others that they are suffering from maladjustment, frustration, and tension.  
Consequently, sincere persons have made numerous attempts to combat the problem of alcoholism, 
seeing it as an escape mechanism for the avoidance of disturbances and unhappiness. Legislation 
and other controls have been established; however, According to the Hindu psychologists, they 
cannot solve the problem until mental and emotional satisfaction is created and will power is 
developed. We have seen persons who controlled this habit by integration of the will. Without a 
strong will it is almost impossible to overcome the habit of drinking because it is basically a 
psychological problem. As is well known, Alcoholics Anonymous appeals to religious motivation 
for strengthening of the will. ^Ambition and the urges of self-expression, knowledge and sex, and 
also the gregarious urge can create frustration and an extreme form of tension, with consequent 
neurotic symptoms and behavior patterns. A great scientist of our acquaintance had many marital 
difficulties. In spite of his scientific achievements, his emotional reactions seemed to be immature 
so that he was always frustrated in the intimate marital relationship. Consequently, he had many 
symptoms of functional ailments in his intimate life. This individual was considerably helped by a 
thoughtful, patient, and persevering wife. We also know a number of persons who developed 
serious neurotic behavior and functional disorders because of the fear of failure in their ambitious 
attempts to have a successful life. Western psychoanalysis has been successful in such situations, as 
Dr. Franz Alexander, Dr. T. M. French, and other psychoanalysts report.2 A number of psychiatrists 
have been helping many such mentally disturbed persons. Religious counselors are also doing good 
work in this field of psychotherapy. Mental tension, which causes neurosis and psychosis, is due to 
ineffective, unfulfilled ambitions and conflict in the mind. According to the majority of the 
psychoanalysts of the West namely, the Freudians conflict and tension are generally created by 
repression of the sex urge due to the activity of the superego namely, certain aspects of religious, 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2	   Franz Alexander, Fundamentals of Psychoanalysis (London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1950). See also Franz 
Alexander and Thomas Morton French, Studies in Psychosomatic Medicine (New York: The Ronald Press Co., 1948). 
Robert W. White, The Abnormal Personality (New York: The Ronald Press Co., 1948), chap. IX, "Psychotherapy: 
Basic Methods." Elihu S. Wing, "Diversion, Relaxation and Sleep." The Rhode Island Medical Journal, XXII (May, 
1939). 	  

	  
11	  
ethical, and social ideals. They also say that tension is caused by conflict between the so-called 
pleasure principle (the modified sex urge) and the death wish. They seem to think that there is harm 
in this conflict but they do not prescribe a thoroughgoing method of overcoming it. In addition, 
their psychoanalysis does not remove the tension created by the pleasure principle itself, so long as 
pleasure remains the supreme objective of life. In the psychoanalytical process, it is true, methods 
of "free association," interpretation of dreams, and transference have been ameliorating in certain 
cases. Indian psychologists do not deny the existence of the desire for the pursuit of pleasure 
through sex expression or other means, but they consider it of secondary importance. It is proper to 
note here that there are some psychologists such as Professor Gordon Allport of Harvard University 
and Professor O. Hobart Mowrer of the University of Illinois; psychiatrists such as Dr. William 
Brown of England, Dr. Carl G. Jung of Switzerland, and a few Americans; and medical men such as 
Dr. Joseph Pratt of Boston and Dr. Harry Bone of New York, who do not take this narrow view of 
the cause of mental disorder. Freudian emphasis on the sex urge has created more tension and 
disturbance than it has cured. Conflict and tension often go together, unless there is inner harmony 
established by higher understanding in the form of religious development. Adlerian psychologists 
declare that the urge of self-expression should be given a proper outlet. As Professor Albert J. 
Levine writes:— 
This feeling of superiority constitutes a sense of Adlerian individuality. It is an all-inclusive and absolute superiority 
into which rationality and irrationality enter as conflicting elements; reason tempers the aspirations of the irrational 
self in its phases of godlike fantasying; while the irrational self feeds the springs of self-esteem and self-glorification.3  
In the study of individuals it is found that when a man has a hedonistic attitude toward life there is 
no end to his self-expression.  
He gradually becomes more and more egocentric and selfish; consequently, when this urge is 
accentuated in him and in others, as it is in modern men and women there is extreme conflict and 
tension.  
Dr. Carl Jung, on the other hand, firmly believes in a broader view of life. According to his view, 
religion is not harmful; on the contrary, it is of great help. He does not seem to have a narrow 
attitude regarding complexes. His interpretation of the libido as the vital force is much broader than 
the Freudian. It is interesting to note what Dr. Gregory Zilboorg has to say about the place of 
religion in psychic disturbances. He states that "there should really be no quarrel with religion on 
the basis of our concepts of guilt."4 Clinical psychologists, such as Professor (X Hobart Mowrer, do 
not feel that religion necessarily creates mental conflict. He says:– 
‘If I can read the signs of our time aright, one of the great tasks which confronts us in our quest for peace 
of mind and more meaningful existence is the rediscovery of ethics' For historical reasons which we have 
already examined, morality and personal responsibility have become unfashionable.’5  
He further says that "religion is right in its contention that the problem of personal happiness and 
normality is inextricably bound up with the moral nature of man."6  
A number of American psychiatrists are taking a broad view of the cause and treatment of psychic 
disturbance. It is refreshing to note that this trend of thought is constructive and healthy. The report 
of the Committee on Psychiatric Social Work of the Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry is an 
outstanding example of this breadth of view. It requires deep consideration. To quote from the 
report:– 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3	  Albert J. Levine, Current Psychologies (Cambridge: Sci-Art Publishers, 1940), p. 207.	  
4	  Gregory Zilboorg, "The Sense of Guilt and Reality," Digest of Neurology and Psychiatry, XVIII (April, 1950), 26.  
5	  O. Hobart Mowrer, "Biological vs. Moral 'Frustration' in Personality Disturbances," Progressive Education, XXVI, 
(January, 1949), p. 67. 	  
6	  Ibid., p. 68. 	  

	  
12	  
 ". . . all the disorders of personality, regardless of the age of the patient, are compounds of disturbed 
interrelationships in which biological, psychological, and sociological processes are always present and 
interwoven." 7 
It is also of interest to observe what Professor Allport has to say in his latest book, The Individual 
and His Religion. He writes:– 
‘It is not psychiatry, but the sciences of government, of sociology, of human relations that have 
overslept. If the psychiatrist is at fault at all, it is because he does not see clearly enough that 
mental health and disease are to a considerable extent dependent upon the social setting. 
Working in isolation he can never solve problems that require concerted effort. Widespread 
improvement in mental health awaits the time when he can work effectively with statesmen, 
sociologists, the clergy, educators, anthropologists, economists, social workers, administrators, 
psychologists, and medical practitioners.8 
 The definite psychotic disturbances, such as dementia praecox, paranoia, manic depressive 
psychosis, and the various types of obsessive and compulsive psychoses can often be traced to one 
or more of the conflicts and tensions described above, although in some individuals there may be 
certain congenital defects in either the nervous system or the emotional structure. However, proper 
psychotherapy car alleviate and often eliminate the symptoms of psychosis. The modern methods of 
electric and insulin shock treatment and lobotomy have been helpful in the relief of many cases; but 
psychiatric and medical authorities realize that psychotherapy is essential after the treatments for 
the establishment of mental harmony and the elimination of further tension and frustration. Clinical 
studies show that many patients become fairly normal after such drastic physical methods, although 
some of the highest authorities in medicine prefer that such treatment should be given with 
considerable caution and only when it is necessary. But in any event, post-shock psychotherapy is 
regarded as essential for permanent cure. The severe psychotic illnesses require, at first, proper 
medical treatment along with psychotherapy. The milder forms of psychosis and the neurotic and 
so-called psychoneurotic disturbances should also be treated by psychotherapy.  
In the West, psychotherapy has gone through various phases during the last century. Even in the 
early part of the nineteenth century, mental disorders were regarded in the West as physiogenic or 
diseases of the brain by psychiatrists such as Griesinger of Germany and French psychiatrists such 
as Morel and Magnan, in line with the Greek and other such traditions. Even the great psychiatrist 
Kraepelin of Germany, who made the greatest contribution in diagnostic technique, was influenced 
by this thought. It was Mesmer of Austria who, just before the French Revolution, introduced a new 
method of treating not only mental disturbances but also many physical disorders through 
psychogenic diagnosis and therapy. In the latter part of the nineteenth century, Charcot, Janet, 
Kraepelin, and Bleuler contributed wonderfully to diagnostic methods. Charcot was the first man 
who went further than Mesmer in recognizing psychogenic causation of physical states as well as 
mental disturbances. Mesmer obscured his method of hypnotic control of other minds through 
mysterious processes. Both Charcot and his follower Janet studied many interesting cases of leg 
paralysis where individuals who could not move during the hours when they were awake walked at 
night in a sleeping state.9 Joseph Breuer and Sigmund Freud of Vienna followed in the footsteps of 
these great French psychiatrists and introduced a revolutionary change both in diagnosis (following 
the classifications of Kraepelin) and in therapy.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7	  "Psychiatric Social Work in the Psychiatric Clinic," (Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry, Committee on 
Psychiatric Social Work, June 1950). P.1. (Typewritten.) 	  
8	  Gordon W. Allport, The Individual and His Religion (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1950), p. 76. 	  
9	  P. Janet, Major Symptoms of Hysteria (2nd ed.; New York: The Macmillan Co., 1920), pp. 28 and 198.  
	  

	  
13	  
The Adlerian method of treatment is a departure from the Freudian method. Adler suggests that the 
psychotherapist should first understand the reason for the sense of superiority through the presence 
of the fear of inferiority. His understanding of mental disturbances is based purely on his original 
thesis of the causation of mental problems, namely, the problem of self-expression. His cure is to 
explain to the client the nature of and reasons for the symptoms and thereby establish proper 
adjustment through the process of rethinking and rewilling. 
 Jung firmly believes in proper mental training after discovering the unconscious causation of 
mental disturbances. He is also a believer that during and after analysis the patient must be 
reeducated so that the individual's philosophy of life will be changed. His emphasis on the training 
process is extremely constructive, as we observe in his Modern Man in Search of a Soul.10  
Karen Homey departs from the orthodox Freudian method of psychoanalysis and calls her method 
self-analysis, although she recognizes that self-analysis is a difficult process for the patient. But she 
tries to remove his doubts and to establish the view that a man can observe himself and analyze his 
own unconscious motivations. She says:– 
 ‘On theoretical grounds, then, I see no stringent reason why self-analysis should not be 
feasible. Granted that many people are too deeply entangled in their own problems to be 
able to analyze themselves; granted that self-analysis can never approximate the speed 
and accuracy of analytical treatment by an expert; granted that there are certain 
resistances that can be surmounted only with outside help still, all of this is no proof that 
in principle the job cannot be done.’11  
She does not seem willing to keep the patient dependent on the analyst. Moreover, she emphasizes 
the development of inner strength and self-confidence.  
Rogers' method of insight is similar to William Brown's autognosis. A counselor, as he terms the 
psychotherapist, helps the patient or client to gain insight into the repressed impulses within 
himself. Like Karen Horney, he emphasizes that the individual must play a great part in discovering 
his own problems. The counselor, through his non-directive counseling, helps the person to 
discover himself. Through this process of discovery the patient takes "self-initiated actions which 
move toward achieving the new goals”12 To continue in Rogers' own words:– 
 ‘These steps are of the most significant sort for growth, though they may relate only to minor 
issues. They create new confidence and independence in the client, and thus reinforce the new 
orientation which has come about through increased insight.’13 
Indian psychology can contribute to the field of psychotherapy. It is a development of the 
aspirations and hopes of the Hindus, Buddhists, and Jains, based on age-long experience transmitted 
in their cultural traditions. It is true that Indian psychology lays great emphasis on the study of 
religious experiences and the development of methods by which to attain them. Yet it also provides 
understanding of the different states of consciousness and therefore is able to make a definite 
therapeutic contribution in psychological problems. As stated previously, most ailments are 
functional, i.e. psychogenic. Since psychogenic illnesses originate in the mind, and the same is true 
of neurotic and psychotic cases, one should consider what therapeutic contributions Indian 
psychology can make to the field of psychogenic diseases, as well as to the integration of the 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10	  C. G. Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1934), chaps. II, III, V, and 
especially XI, "Psychotherapy and the Clergy." See also Psychology and Religion (London: Oxford University Press, 
1938).  
11	  Karen Horney, Self-Analysis (London: Routledge Kegan Paul Ltd., 1942), p. 27.   	  
12	  Carl R. Rogers, Counseling and Psychotherapy (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1942), p. 216 	  
13	  Ibid.	  

	  
14	  
emotions and personality. For the development of personality is of vital importance to a successful 
and happy life.  
Indian psychology has grown out of religious concepts. That is the reason that it basically clarifies 
the philosophy of life. However, it does not neglect the different states of mind conscious, 
unconscious, and super conscious. The objective of psychological pursuit in India is to reach the 
super conscious state through integration of the conscious and unconscious. Indian psychologists 
also give great emphasis to the purification and harmonization of the unconscious. According to 
Indian psychologists, the unconscious is not necessarily the storehouse of the dark side of life, nor 
of the conflict of the id and superego, nor again of the pleasure principle and death wish. It contains 
all the accumulated tendencies from individual past thoughts and actions, cultural background, and 
hereditary impressions and environmental conditions. Herein lies its therapeutic value and utility.  
Every civilization has a dominant ideal or goal toward which it strives. The same is true of every 
individual. Indian psychologists, along with most of the Indian philosophers, say that the primary 
objective of life is the ultimate realization of the divinity of man, or the manifestation of the divinity 
that is already in him, as Swami Vivekananda puts it. This expression can be variously elaborated. 
It goes without saying that the whole emphasis of Indian psychology (Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain) is 
on the attainment of paramārtha (supreme value), namely, the realization of God, Atman, or 
Brahman, or Ātma-jñāna (self-knowledge), or the attainment of Nirvana of the Buddhists. 
According to the Indian psychologists and philosophers, the pursuit of happiness on the sense plane, 
the practical training for it, and even ethical culture or the use of practical methods are all secondary 
objectives of life. These are means for the attainment of the primary objective.  
Hedonism or the pursuit of sense pleasure is not negated; it is rather subordinated to the supreme 
goal of life. It is a mistake to think that all Indian psychologists would advocate the negation of 
pleasure in the world. On the contrary, they all show us how to train ourselves so that we can have 
legitimate pleasure and harmonious living on the sense plane and at the same time move toward the 
supreme goal. As it is said in the Katha Upanishad:– 
 One thing is the good and (quite) different indeed is the pleasant; being of different requisitions, 
they both bind the Purusha. Good befalls him who follows the good, but he loses the goal, who 
chooses the pleasant.  
Both the good and the pleasant approach man; the wise one discriminates between the two 
having examined them (well). Yea, the wise man prefers the good to the pleasant, but the fool 
chooses the pleasant through avarice and attachment.14  
The senses of one who is always of unrestrained mind and devoid of right understanding, 
become uncontrollable like the wicked horses of a charioteer.  
The senses of him who is always of restrained mind and has right understanding, are controllable 
like the good horses of a charioteer.  
And he who is devoid of proper understanding, thoughtless and always impure, never attains that 
goal, and gets into the round of births and deaths.  
But he who is intelligent, ever pure and with the mind controlled, reaches that goal whence none 
is born again.15  
In the Dhammapada (a Buddhist treatise) it is declared:– 
‘He who gives himself to vanity, and does not give himself to meditation, forgetting the real 
aim (of life) and grasping at pleasure, will in time envy him who has exerted himself in 
meditation.’16  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
14	  Katha Upanishad II: 1–2 	  
15	  Ibid. III: 5-8.  

	  
15	  
It is said in Uttaradhyayana (of the Jaina tradition):– 
 ‘By renouncing pleasure he attains freedom from false longing, whereby he becomes 
compassionate, humble, free from sorrow, and destroys karma produced by delusion regarding 
conduct.’ 17 
Indian psychologists give psychological training so that the causes of mental disturbances may be 
eliminated. In the Bhagavad-Gita  
 Sri Krishna says that when the mental conditions are disturbed there is no peace; and without peace 
there is no happiness.  
‘But the self-controlled man, moving among objects with senses under restraint, and free from 
attraction and aversion, attains to tranquility.  
In tranquility, all sorrow is destroyed. For the intellect of him who is tranquil-minded, is soon 
established in firmness.  
No knowledge (of the Self) has the unsteady. Nor has he meditation. To the non-meditative 
there is no peace. And how can one without peace have happiness?18 
It might seem that these philosophical and religious ideals will create more and more tension, as 
Freud and many of his followers think, by creating a strong superego which represses the natural 
and normal tendencies of man. Indian psychologists, however, do not advocate the repression of 
human tendencies. Rather, they emphasize the control and transformation of emotional urges that 
create tension, conflict, frustration, and unhappiness. In Raja Yoga Patanjali says:– 
 The fine Saṃskāras [subtle impressions] are to be conquered by resolving them into their 
causal state. By meditation, their (gross) modifications are to be rejected.19  
The first two steps of Raja Yoga are clear indications of the emphasis of Indian psychology. Yama 
(ethical observation and mental control) and niyama (physical cleansing and dietetic restrictions and 
some forms of mental training) are purificatory processes for higher mental development. Rather 
than repression, these are methods for changing the course of the emotions. Krishna, in the 
Bhagavad-Gita, Buddhists, in the Dhammapada, and Jainas, in the Uttaradhyayana, and other Indian 
teachers of different traditions made clear that they did not mean repression but rather 
transformation and redirection of the emotions. Sri Ramakrishna and Swami Vivekananda also in 
recent times show how to change the course of emotions and direct them to God. Sri Ramakrishna 
says:– 
‘So long as these passions [lust, anger, etc.] are directed toward the world and its objects, they 
behave as enemies; but when they are directed toward God, they become the best friends of 
man, for then they lead him unto God.’20   
And according to Swami Vivekananda:– 
 ‘……. The central secret is, therefore, to know that the various passions and feelings, and 
emotions in the human heart are not wrong in themselves; only they have to be carefully 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16	  Dhammapada, trans. Max Muller, Vol. X, Sacred Books of the East (London: Oxford University Press, 1924), chap. 
XIV: 209. 	  
17	  Uttaradhyayana – discourse 24	  
18	  Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita, trans. Swami Swarupananda (5th ed.; Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama, 
1933) chap. II: 64-66. 	  
19	  Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali II: 10-11	  
20	  Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna (3rd ed.; Mylapore, Madras: The Ramakrishna Math, 1925), chap. X: 302.  

	  
16	  
controlled and given a higher and higher direction, until they attain the very highest condition 
of excellence. The highest direction is that which takes us to God…..’21 
Indian psychologists thus take the primary and secondary emotions of man as given facts and try to 
use them for higher development.  
They realize that as long as man accepts hedonism and pursues pleasure as the primary objective of 
life, frustration and tension are inevitable. As it is observed, the objects of sense enjoyment change; 
and man, himself the subject of enjoyment, also changes. When he is a child, he enjoys dolls and 
toys to the utmost. In adolescence, he enjoys living, moving companions. Again in maturity he 
finds pleasure in other functions of life. His interests change, and the world that he experiences also 
changes. His friends and relatives are different; social and economic conditions are in a state of 
flux. If he thinks that in this finite world he can have continuous sense pleasure as he likes, he is 
bound to be frustrated and full of tension.  
In his book, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Freud takes a fatalistic attitude. He says:– 
 "I cannot believe in the existence of  such [an impulse toward perfection] and I see no way of 
preserving the pleasing illusion."22  
Again he says:– 
 "Substitution or reaction formations and sublimations avail nothing toward relaxing the 
continual tension."23  
It seems that Freud and his followers, such as Karl Menninger and others, lead the people into a 
blind alley with their theory that the pleasure and suicide urges are basic in man. If that be the case, 
there is no hope for success in the removal of tension and frustration by methods prescribed in the 
Western systems of psychotherapy advocated by Freud, Menninger,24 and others. Indian 
psychologists declare that hedonism is not the primary objective of life. Moreover, hedonism and 
inordinate desire for satisfaction in sense pleasure will keep up tension in the mind and will lead to 
frustration; this is set forth in the teachings of Sri Krishna, Patanjali, Sri Ramakrishna, and others. 
The great Christian mystics and religious leaders take the same point of view. Instead of creating 
conflict and tension, Indian psychology removes the causes of these mental disorders by furnishing 
the religious ideal as the supreme goal of life. In clinical and counseling experiences, it becomes 
clear that without changing the outlook on life from hedonism   and the pleasure principle to the 
religious ideal one cannot make any durable therapeutic contribution to cases of neurosis and 
psychosis.  
Over emphasis on sense pleasure as the supreme goal of life in the modern world is creating more 
and more mental disturbances, to the extent of actually frightening people. Therefore there is a real 
need for understanding religious psychology both Indian and Western. It is interesting to note what 
Professor O. Hobart Mowrer, University of Illinois, has to say after studying an enormous number 
of cases both at Harvard University and the University of Illinois. He writes:  
In therapy it is therefore true that there is a kind of unlearning that must occur unlearning of the 
"skills" and strategies by which conditioning, whether by society or by conscience, has been 
warded off. These strategies must be activated in the therapy, but they must then be shown to be 
ineffective and, indeed, unnecessary. The way is then opened for the more basic kind of emotional 
learning against which past problem solving behavior has served as a protection. Religious leaders 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21	  The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda (Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama, 1932), III, 78. (This 
reference shall hereafter be known as Works.) 	  
22	  Sigmund Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle (London: International Psychoanalytic Press, 1922), p. 	  
23	  Ibid p. 53	  
24	  Karl A. Menninger, Man against Himself (New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., Inc., 1938). See also Love against Hate 
(London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1942). 	  

	  
17	  
are fond of saying that a sinner can be saved only if he "opens his heart to God." Perhaps we can 
appropriately paraphrase this statement by saying that a neurotic can be cured only if he "opens 
his heart" to the great moral teachings and emotional values of his society.25  
Dr. Fritz Kunkel gives a pertinent statement: "Both psychoanalysis and individual psychology fall 
short. Religious psychology is necessary."26  Professor Allport has an interesting reflection to make 
in this connection:– 
“The single fact that weighs against this wholly secular solution is the ever insistent truth that 
what a man believes to a large extent determines his mental and physical health. What he believes 
about his business, his associates, his wife, his immediate future, is important; even more so, what 
he believes about life in general, its purpose and design. Religious belief, simply because it deals 
with fundamentals, often turns out to be the most important belief of all.”27  
An egocentric, selfish attitude in life necessarily creates certain tendencies in a person which 
become strong barriers to harmonious interpersonal relationships. Egocentric people do not know 
how to adjust themselves even in their intimate relationship with others, either with other 
egocentrics or with altruists; nor do they have any real understanding of how to adapt themselves to 
the varying conditions of life. Consequently, at difficult stages and conditions of life, they become 
absolutely helpless. It is noticed that in adolescence and middle age people find it hard to adapt 
themselves to their own physical changes and to changing environmental conditions. They develop 
a considerable number of mental and nerve ailments. By furnishing a sound philosophy of life, with 
the attainment of divinity and knowledge of God or Self-knowledge as the supreme objective, 
Indian psychology removes the causes of maladjustment, as it gives a background against which a 
man can minimize the importance of the varying conditions of life. It also teaches him that he 
should have harmonious interpersonal relationships, since various people are the manifestations of 
God or the Self, and consequently their interests are not basically different. In fact, this attitude 
strikes at the root of egocentricity which is the chief cause of maladjustment in life. So this is one of 
the most important contributions of Indian psychology to the psychology of adjustment as it is 
discussed in Western countries by social psychologists and psychiatrists.  
Human beings have such primary urges as self-preservation, self-expression, sex-expression, 
knowledge, gregarious expression, and so forth. They also have secondary emotions such as fear, 
anger, envy, jealousy, and so forth. Indian psychologists do not claim that any one of these is the 
solitary urge of the human mind. Like McDougall they accept the existence of divergent urges and 
emotions operating in the human mind and they firmly believe that there is a supreme urge under 
which all urges are subordinated. McDougall declares that there is a "master sentiment" which 
controls all other sentiments like the "commander-in-chief of the army."28 In his Social Psychology, 
he seems to differ radically from the Indian idea of the supreme goal in his interpretation of the 
master urge. However, he agrees that a man "has not strong will and character in the full sense, but 
rather what would be called specialized character.”29 Unfortunately, McDougall could not 
understand or find the supreme goal or master .sentiment to which the primary urges are related, in 
spite of his breadth of Viewpoint and sincere efforts. His hormic or purposive theory should be 
appreciated, however.  
On the other hand, William Brown of London, in his Science and Personality, seems to be one with 
the Indian psychologists in his thinking. According to him:– 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25	   O.Hobart Mowrer, "Learning Theory and the Neurotic Paradox," The American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, XVIII, 
No. 4 (October 1948), 605.  
26	  Fritz Kunkel, In Search of Maturity (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1943). P- 34 
27	  Allport, The Individual and His Religion, p. 79. 	  
28	  William McDougall, Outline of Abnormal Psychology (London: Methuen & Co., Ltd., 1926), p. 546. 	  
29	  William McDougall, Social Psychology (London: Methuen & Co., Ltd., 1918), pp. 266-267. 	  

	  
18	  
This supreme sentiment, named by McDougall the "master-sentiment," will be a system of 
instinctive emotional dispositions centered about one supreme object Such an object will be as 
general as possible and as all-inclusive as possible. What should the object be? Clearly it should 
be the universe as a perfected system, as the full realization of the Good, the Beautiful, and the 
True.30   
The viewpoint of Gestalt also cannot solve the problem of mental disturbances, in spite of its value 
in stressing wholes in the mental life. It is not specific enough. On the other hand, Indian 
psychologists declare that the "master sentiment" is the desire for an abiding happiness which 
transcends the sense plane. Man seeks it, thinking erroneously that through the primary urges he 
will have it. So it is said in one of the Upanishads: "There is joy in the infinite; there is no joy in the 
finite."31 Buddhism gives us the same idea:– 
 "The gift of the Dharma exceeds all gifts; the sweetness of the Dharma exceeds all sweetness; the 
delight in the Dharma exceeds all delight; the extinction of thirst overcomes all pain."32 
This indeed is a special contribution of Indian psychology and of both Eastern and Western 
mysticism. This viewpoint has tremendous therapeutic value. Unless a man accepts it as the ideal of 
life there is no possibility for the permanent removal of his mental tension and frustration. So long 
as his mind remains attracted to the sense plane as the supreme goal of life, there will be inevitable 
mental conflict, tension, and frustration.  
Some of the Indian thinkers suggest that one should cultivate die spirit of repulsion, but not 
repression, toward the objects of the senses. This is regarded by many Western scholars, no doubt, 
as a negative attitude toward life and world. Nevertheless, in Buddhist, Jaina, and some of the 
Hindu traditions this method has been used to remove extreme forms of selfish desire for sense 
enjoyment.33 It is accepted by all Indian religious and philosophical thinkers, as well as by great 
Western mystics, that attachment for objects of the senses distracts the mind and makes it tense, 
creating inevitable frustration and consequent functional diseases and mental disturbances.  
There are other Indian thinkers who suggest the positive method, namely, subordination of the 
desire for the pursuit of happiness on the sense plane in order to attain the supreme goal of 
realization of the Infinite. Their idea is to see the Ultimate Reality in all. It is said in Isha 
Upanishad:  
"Whatever there is changeable in this ephemeral world; all this must be enveloped by the Lord. . . 
. Only performing ordained works should one desire to live one hundred years. Thus and in no 
other way can one be free from the taint of evil deeds as long as you are fond of your human 
life.”34 
According to many of the Indian teachers, one should cultivate a positive thought of the divine in 
all objects and feel the presence of God or the Self in all; the disturbing mental reactions and the 
tensions are then overcome. Following the lead of the  Isha Upanishad, the Gita, in clarifying the 
idea of performing work in the spirit of duty, emphasizes the efficacy of this so-called positive 
method without negating life and the world. In fact, the Karma Yoga of the Gita shows how lower 
human propensities can be transformed into higher qualities.  
 Indian psychology is not merely conceptual or theoretical. Its therapeutic value is in its teaching of 
various methods for mental integration. It prescribes systems of physical and mental discipline 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
30	  William Brown, Science and Personality (London: Oxford University Press, 1929), P. 79 
31	  Chhandogya Upanishad, chap. VII, sec. 23. 	  
32	  Dhammapada, trans. Max Muller, XXIV: 354. 	  
33	   Henry Clarke Warren, Buddhism in Translation ("Harvard Oriental Series," III [Cambridge: Harvard University, 
1896]), chap. I, "Visuddhi Magga"; chap. XII, "Digha-Nikaya," and "Visuddhi Magga."  
34	  lsha Upanishad, verses 1–2.  

	  
19	  
which gradually stabilize the mind and integrate the emotions. After the preparatory ethical steps of 
yama and niyama of Patanjali, certain physical processes are introduced. In yama and niyama, 
Hindu psychologists not only give us ethical training and redirection of the emotions; they also 
show us how some of the disturbed emotions can be transformed by cultivating opposite tendencies. 
Patanjali declares that positive, constructive thoughts and emotions should be cultivated in order to 
obstruct and remove the disturbing mental states. He says:– 
 "Friendship, mercy, gladness and indifference being thought of in regard to subjects happy, 
unhappy, good, and evil respectively, pacify the mind."35   
In his commentary on this Aphorism, Swami Vivekananda states:– 
 We must have friendship for all. We must be merciful toward those who are in misery. When the 
people are happy we must be happy and to the wicked we must be indifferent. ... If the subject is a 
good one we shall feel friendly to it; if the subject of thought is one that is miserable we must be 
merciful toward the subject If it is good we must be glad; if it is evil we must be indifferent.36  
Then he says:– 
 "These attitudes of mind to different subjects that come before it will make the mind peaceful."37  
In these two steps, yama and niyama, there are certain dietary regulations and methods for purifying 
the elementary physical functions, so that the nervous system can be strengthened and quieted for 
the still higher steps of Raja Yoga. The third and fourth steps of Raja Yoga the practice of 
comfortable posture (asana) and breathing exercises (pranayama) are meant for the relaxation of 
the neuro-muscular system and for quelling the restlessness of the mind. Recently, in America, a 
few psychotherapists have started giving thought training and relaxation exercises, as they realize 
that most people do not know how to relax the neuro-muscular system. But these practices are not 
deep enough to do effective work. Indian psychologists anticipated all these frailties centuries ago 
and instituted sound methods for relaxation so that the mind could function properly in the practice 
of deep concentration. This is another unique contribution of Indian psychology to psychotherapy. 
Patanjali and the Tantric schools were fully aware of the necessity of psychophysical practices for 
physical health and religious growth. Psychotherapy is ancient. Buddhist and Jaina teachers and 
Alwars and Nayanars and other such leaders belonging to different religious groups in India are one 
in the emphasis on mental discipline and exercises.  
Indian psychologists also prescribe definite methods for the practice of concentration (dhāraṇa) and 
meditation (dhyāna) which are essential for the development of will power. The various methods 
prescribed by the Western schools of thought lack considerably in the technique of developing 
dynamic functioning of the will, in spite of their ameliorating effect. Psychoanalysis, self-analysis 
of various types, autognosis, and insight no doubt help in the understanding of the causes of mental 
problems, and may often help in removing a certain amount of tension. Yet they do not seem to 
unify the will. Permanent cure can only be attained in the majority of the cases by the integration of 
the will and the manifestation of its power of concentration on the divine, or by the methods 
prescribed by other teachers of India. In Uttaradhyayana, of the Jaina tradition, it is declared: "By 
consciousness of thought he attains stability of mind."38 Buddha's fourth truth, namely, "The Way of 
Cessation of Sorrows," emphasizes the necessity for stabilizing the mind through right 
comprehension, right effort, and other steps leading to the practice of meditation (dhyāna). The 
practice of concentration and meditation as prescribed by the Svetasvatara Upanishad, Sri Krishna, 
Patanjali, and modern teachers like Sri Ramakrishna, Swami Vivekananda, Swami Brahmananda, 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
35	  Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali I: 33. 	  
36	  Works, I:222.  
37	  Ibid	  
38	  Uttaradhyayana, discourse XXIX.	  

	  
20	  
and others is essential. Many of the Tantric schools, such as Shat-chakra-nirupana, also advocate 
definite practices. (Methods prescribed by the great Christians, such as St. Ignatius Loyola, should 
also be mentioned, even though they are not used by the Western psychotherapists.) The primary 
objective of these practices is the knowledge of God or the realization of the Ultimate Reality or the 
Buddhist nirvana. Yet these Practices integrate the mind and unify the will, bringing out its hidden, 
unmanifested powers. [Indian psychology excels in prescribing methods for the integration of the 
will, emotions, and thought through concentration and meditation. It is observed in case studies that 
disorganized and disturbed mental conditions ire gradually stabilized, harmonized, and unified by 
systematic practice. Apart from the knowledge of God, the therapeutic value of these exercises is 
immense.39  
It stands to reason that when there is a psychosomatic relationship or psychophysical parallelism the 
stabilization of the mind will in turn stabilize the physical functions of the person. Mind for the time 
being functions through the nervous system. Consequently, when there is a change in the mind 
there is a change in the nervous system and vice versa. So the Indian psychologists suggest that one 
should have certain regulations for food and drink in order to keep the body especially the nervous 
system strong and healthy. Nerve strength is needed for the strength of .he mind. On the other hand, 
certain types of mental training ire essential for physical health. Hindu and other schools of Indian 
psychology recognize these facts and accordingly prescribe the methods of harmonizing the mental 
and physical functions of man.  
When a person practices concentration for a little while, his hidden unconscious tendencies (or 
samskāras) become clear to him. The Indian method of strengthening the mind enables a person to 
have insight into the cause of his mental tension. Apart from that, his unconscious urges are 
gradually and spontaneously eliminated in and through the practice of concentration.  
The processes prescribed by Indian psychology for strengthening the will and illumining the mind 
are also unique contributions to the field of psychology and psychotherapy. The West can be greatly 
benefited by the knowledge of these methods.  
Disrupted personalities of men and women with tension and conflict cannot easily practice 
concentration, for they are unable to concentrate the mind on anything even for a minute. According 
to Indian psychology, they are given a divine symbol or statue or picture for their object of 
concentration. They are also given a method for recapitulating the incidents of the lives of divine 
personalities, as the Vaishnava teachers of India prescribe. The repetition of the name of God, as 
suggested by Tantrikas, Vaishnavas, and Saivas, is helpful in the beginning of the practice of 
concentration. It will be proper to mention here that the Roman Catholic Church and Eastern 
Orthodox Church also advocate the repetition of the name of God. These and other such exercises 
gradually remove the mental disturbances and unify the emotions.  
Along with the therapeutic value of Indian psychology, there is a dynamic effect on the 
development of personality. Indian psychologists believe that the personality is integrated 
only*when the total mind is unified and harmonized. An integrated personality can alone help 
others in their emotional disturbances. An Indian guru, or any spiritual teacher, should not only be 
an instructor of philosophy, theology, and conceptual religion; he should also be an integrated 
personality. He must not have disturbing emotional conflicts and tension. The qualifications of a 
spiritual teacher include emotional stability, without which he cannot impart spiritual knowledge to 
his disciple, or shisya. If anyone wants effectively to help a disturbed person, he himself must be 
free from mental disturbances. The Buddhist teaching in Saddharma Pundarika declares:_ 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
39	  Swami Brahmananda, a great disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, time and again declared that when the mind is stabilized 
through concentration and meditation and other such practices, even the body and nervous system become healthy. 	  

	  
21	  
 ‘Let the sage first, for some time, coerce his thoughts, exercise meditation with complete 
absorption, and correctly perform all that is required for attaining spiritual insight, and then, 
after rising (from his pious meditation), preach with unquailing mind.’40  
Psychotherapists must be emotionally stable persons. It is often noticed that a man of tension and 
frustration attempts to advise others. Indian psychology recognizes that such persons cannot give 
durable help in therapeutic work. On the other hand, it is often observed that if any mentally 
disorganized person even remains in the company of a spiritually stable person, he tends to become 
stabilized and his tension vanishes.  
Hindu and other schools of Indian psychology can make a tremendous contribution to the 
development of personality through the integration of the emotions and development of will, both 
of which are essential for harmonious and peaceful living as well as for spiritual realization. Indian 
teachers of Raja Yoga or the psychological method discovered the technique of mental development 
in its totality emotion, volition, and cognition as they realized that mere conceptual knowledge does 
not integrate the total personality.  
 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
40	  Saddharma Pundarika, chap. XIII	  

	  
22	  
CHAPTER 2 
How to Overcome Anxiety 
NXIETY is one of the greatest problems disturbing most human beings. Psychologically 
speaking there is a difference between the secondary emotion of fear, as a reaction from 
any of the primitive urges, and the emotion of anxiety. Fear is based on actual knowledge 
of a thing or incident that may threaten a person's existence, self-expression, pursuit of knowledge, 
or any other such primary urge or instinct; while anxiety generally arises as a result of apprehension 
of something unknown which seems to create conflict, tension, and disturbance in the primitive 
urges. The cause of anxiety may remain in the unconscious mind, so that a person may not always 
be fully aware of the cause. The human mind is distressed by certain conditions of life which create 
mental tension. There should not be two opinions among the psychologists and psychiatrists 
regarding the fact that anxiety and apprehension constitute one of the most disturbing problems that 
they face, creating all sorts of disorders such as insomnia and such functional diseases as heart 
trouble, circulatory disturbances, and glandular difficulties. Many symptoms of neuroses can be 
traced to anxiety. Neurotic people, in turn, show more and more anxiety, which creates a vicious 
circle. Such symptoms have become a social issue as they affect interpersonal relationships. Some 
of the social problems like aggression can also be traced to the same source. Because anxiety is a 
social problem, modern psychologists and psychiatrists are trying to find a method for overcoming 
it. They feel that if they are successful in this they can remove one of the greatest causes of human 
suffering and agony.  
Generally speaking, anxiety neuroses are common in the middle class and wealthy class. Mostly, 
the poorer people cannot afford them; they have to work hard and they have little leisure time. But 
many poor are nonetheless neurotic. Those who are financially comfortable should have no anxiety 
regarding their creature comforts; besides their wealth they have everything beautiful homes, 
servants, power, position. Yet somehow or other they still have anxiety because they have not found 
the purpose of their lives.  
Anxiety is present also in many young scholars in the universities. This is not due to any lack in 
avenues of self-expression. It is because they feel that they must be like Professor Dewey, Professor 
Hocking, or President Conant and Dr. Compton; they have formed unrealistic ideas. In the 
competitive world some are afraid to try to attain their goal; others try and fail to achieve what they 
desire. In either instance, they become disturbed. Many serious scholars develop anxiety because 
their positions become jeopardized or because they cannot get what they desire.  
If we recall the early part of our lives and analyze our experiences we find that when any of the 
primary biological urges were threatened we began to develop anxiety, for certain biological 
reasons. When a child realizes that he is in an unknown situation he becomes apprehensive and 
anxious. Recently, we heard an interesting story in this connection. A mother was putting her young 
son to bed. She kissed him, bade him good night, and put out the light. The boy began to cry, so the 
mother returned and asked him why he was crying. "I don't like to be alone in the dark," was his 
reply. The mother said to him: "Oh, now, why should you be alone? God is here with you." The 
little boy said: "Then I want to see His face." He was not satisfied with an invisible, unknown God. 
He wanted to see the visible familiar face of his mother so that he would be free from anxiety and 
apprehension in the dark. He could not depend on something intangible.  
Babies cry the moment they are hungry. They are impelled to cry because there is a sense of 
insecurity in their hunger. The growth of the child presupposes to some extent this kind of anxiety 
for his physical existence. Biologists, especially of the Darwinian school, tell us that the struggle for 
existence is inherent in the living cell, the living being. Consequently, it may be admitted that a 
A 

	  
23	  
certain type of anxiety is also essential for the development of an individual, but only as a means to 
life, not as a frustration.  
Anxiety and apprehension can also be traced to certain religious attitudes. Many religious leaders 
and some psychologists of religion declare that religion begins with a kind of guilt consciousness. 
But often this consciousness of sin and guilt creates neurotic behavior patterns. When it is 
overemphasized, the disproportionately cultivated sense of sin positively harms the personality. An 
example is seen in the case of a young woman of thirty who developed an anxiety neurosis of such 
an extent that she was unable to carry out the ordinary duties of married life. When she was six or 
seven years old, she was told by her mother and religious instructors that some of her childhood 
habits were sinful. She was also told that when a little girl indulged in lying, coveting, and 
quarreling with other children, or committing some of the naughty acts of childhood, she would be 
punished by God. This made a deep impression on her mind and she would often remain awake and 
almost paralyzed in bed at night in fear of damnation. When she grew up and was married, she lived 
a normal life with her husband until the time of the depression. Her husband had considerable 
financial difficulty which brought to her mind her old childhood anxiety. She had a few treatments 
from a psychiatrist. Unfortunately, she was not able to overcome her anxiety and she became 
disintegrated. It was difficult for her to go anywhere alone. In fact, she was brought to us by a 
young friend who had to escort her around. After a number of visits, we disclosed the cause of her 
terrible mental depression and her anxiety neurosis. She was advised to change her outlook on life 
and its values. She was also told that God is not a ruthless, tyrannical Being, who punishes us for 
our little transgressions, but God is a loving Being. We explained that while man suffers from the 
consequences of his own wrongdoings, he also has the possibility of changing his thoughts and 
actions. It was emphasized that this young woman was inseparably connected with the all-loving 
God who is ever ready to render His help and love when anyone wants to make a change in his or 
her life. She realized that she had not to be afraid of the wrath of God because of her childhood 
habits. She was also helped to realize that financial security is not the main concern of life; it is only 
a means to the goal of love and knowledge of God. She was given systematic practices of relaxation 
and meditation which gradually strengthened her will power. The change of her outlook on life and 
her new attitude toward God, coupled with the strengthening of will power through the practice of 
concentration, gave her new hope and aspiration, and her anxiety was gradually removed. When 
this young woman reoriented her religious attitude, and understood the place of wrongdoing in life, 
she gained normality. This and many such cases indicate that anxiety can be caused by wrong 
understanding and wrong emphasis of the religious attitude and sense of guilt even though its cause 
may not operate in the conscious mind.  
Failure in some phases of life can create depression and anxiety. An internationally known scholar 
failed in his marriage after having a few children. The dissolution of the marriage affected him very 
much. It caused a deep apprehension about marriage. When he married a second time, he developed 
an extreme form of anxiety neurosis which almost paralyzed him in his marital relationship. This 
marriage would have been a colossal failure but for the wisdom of his second wife. She understood 
the reason for this man's nervousness and other symptoms. With deep understanding, patience, and 
love she actually reassured the man of his success in marriage. Gradually, all of the symptoms of 
the neurosis vanished. A child was born to them and they remained happily married. This case 
shows that just as the negative attitude toward life and the negative emotional reactions of 
husbands, wives, friends, or relatives can create psychological and physical disturbances in others, 
similarly, positive and encouraging emotional expressions can build up a healthy personality.  
A young scholar was inspired by the achievements of contemporary thinkers. Being anxious to 
attain a great position in his early youth, he disturbed his mental equilibrium in such a way that he 
developed neurotic symptoms. He also developed some of the behavior patterns typical of neurotic 
persons. By mental training and discipline along with an understanding of the proper values of life 

	  
24	  
and the meaning of real achievement, he was helped to get rid of the cause, and consequently of the 
symptoms, of neurosis.  
Naturally, social scientists, religious leaders, and psychotherapists are seeking the remedy for 
anxiety. Sociologists are trying to give us a better understanding of society, while some social and 
natural scientists are anxious to remove the physical limitations of man by using the forces of nature 
for his comfort. They also want to eliminate some of the evils of industrial civilization. Professor 
Mayo and others have contributed immensely to the betterment of the industrial situation by 
working to remove the anxiety and apprehension of labor and management.41  
It has been found by research groups in this country, who are studying the evils of industrial 
civilization, that the industries, which were set up to remove the causes of anxiety and apprehension 
by producing the necessities of life with the output of consumers goods, are creating instead various 
social problems. Suicide, delinquency, alcoholism, and other moral and social evils have become 
prevalent.42 Even a casual perusal of the reports will convince us that the method of mere 
industrialization is not enough.  
Many people take to alcoholism and drugs because of anxiety. We have already discussed the 
professional man who developed a sense of guilt due to malpractice in his work and took to 
excessive drinking. Instead of alleviating the neurotic condition, alcohol disorganized his 
personality. Many similar instances are known.  
Merely fulfilling physical requirements does not solve the problem of anxiety. If it did, America 
would not have so many cases of "anxiety neurosis," since this country is the last word in post 
Renaissance Western civilization and has practically all that modern science can provide for the 
pursuit of happiness on the physical plane of existence. The people desire more and more 
commodities instead of being satisfied with what they have. This gradually creates a peculiar sense 
of anxiety in the mind and makes man increasingly selfish. Although the psychiatrists and 
psychologists are trying to remove anxiety, it must be admitted that, in spite of their noble attempts, 
they are failing to attain their objective. Sociologists and psychiatrists of different schools of 
thought are to be admired for their intentions yet they do not touch the basic problem. They give 
symptomatic treatment without going to the root of the difficulty.  
The rate of increase in functional ailments is alarming. What is happening to our human society? 
People now have almost anything they want higher wages and all the comforts that science can 
give. Yet the problem of apprehension and anxiety has not been eliminated. There is something 
wrong with the very basis, structure, and outlook of this type of civilization, if this problem still 
persists.  
If you had gone to Europe and Asia before the war, you would have seen the difference between the 
standards of living in America and those places. Even in England, which until recently was the 
greatest imperialistic country in the world, you could see the difference between the comforts of 
American and of British life. If anxiety could be removed by applied science, the American people 
would have no such suffering. However, just the opposite is true; mental disturbances are increasing 
by leaps and bounds. They are major topics of discussion in any medical meeting. A president of 
the American Psychiatric Association reported to us during World War II that the cost for the care 
of mental cases resulting from the war could not be met by the taxpayers. It is a threatening 
situation.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
41	  Elton Mayo, The Social Problems of an Industrial Civilization (Boston: Division of Research, Graduate School of 
Business Administration, Harvard University, 1945). 	  
42	  Elton Mayo, The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1933).  
	  

	  
25	  
There is an inherent defect in this anxious outlook on life. It creates a desire for more and more 
possessions. There is dissatisfaction in the mind before a person achieves what he desires. He wants 
a good living; he makes a good living; but he wants more than that. He may become a millionaire 
but he is not satisfied; he wants to become a multi-millionaire. If he becomes a multi-millionaire, he 
wants to control others. He wants to establish a monopoly, then a cartel. Still he is not satisfied but 
wishes to control the industries of other countries. And so it goes. The last two wars were fought 
because of selfish desires for more and more power, position, money, and economic opportunity. 
The late Senator Borah said after World War I that one group of thieves stole the world and tried to 
keep what they took; another group of thieves were going to get it just before America joined World 
War II.  
History proves to us that whenever people subscribe to this grasping outlook on life, they gradually 
destroy themselves. This inherent defect is known to have been prevalent in previous civilizations 
which disintegrated. Rome is an outstanding example. We have no reason to believe that we can 
escape the same fate under similar conditions, even though our sociologists, psychologists, and 
others are trying to remove the evils of modern living. Twenty years ago there was an extensive 
humanistic movement in the United States and Europe, but it failed to touch the life of the people. 
Even today humanists are trying to remedy the ills of society but they cannot do it. And why should 
a man serve his neighbor and refrain from taking everything for himself as long as the greatest 
amount of pleasure is the objective of life?  
Sociologists say that people cannot be happy or keep their money unless they share with others. 
Professor Mayo and his contemporaries state that there must be better understanding between labor 
and management; otherwise, business and industry will be seriously affected by disputes and 
strikes, and the American people will not be able to compete with the totalitarian countries. To 
avoid disputes and strikes some of the sociologists and progressive economists advocate higher 
wages, social security, and other such measures for the comfort and welfare of the labor group. 
People should also give to others some share of their income or investments, if possible. But why 
should a man share for the sake of expediency? He may do so at times, as during a war, but this will 
increase and not decrease his anxiety and tension. World history reveals that unless the very basis of 
selfishness is removed, man does not and cannot work for others without having mental 
dissatisfaction. It is a peculiar situation. Unless the ideals and aspirations of the human mind are 
changed, there is no possible solution for the struggle between labor and management, between the 
feudal chief and the working man, between the haves and have-nots.  
We admit that anxiety neuroses can be traced to unregulated primitive biological urges and 
unadjusted social conditions; but the remedy is not to be found in uncontrolled satisfaction of 
primary urges or in egocentric, selfish social behavior. Our suggestion is that primary biological 
urges as well as problems arising from social conditions can be regulated and adjusted to eliminate 
the cause of anxiety from the human personality. This can be accomplished by shifting our outlook 
from satisfaction on the physical plane to satisfaction on the ethical and spiritual plane. 
Civilizations which were based on the religious ideal eliminated the cause of anxiety because they 
did not have sensate culture. As Professor Sorokin emphasizes, sensate culture is bound to create 
certain problems which cause anxiety and dissatisfaction. Swami Vivekananda also says:– 
 In the West, they are trying to solve the problem how much a man can possess, and we are trying 
here [in India] to solve the problem on how little a man can live. This struggle and difference will 
go on for some centuries. But if history has any truth in it, and if prognostications ever prove true, 
it must be that those who train themselves to live on the least and control themselves well, will in 
the end gain the battle, and that those who run after enjoyment and luxury, however vigorous they 
seem for the moment, will have to die and become annihilated. There are times in the history of a 
man's life, nay, in the history of the lives of nations, when a sort of world-weariness becomes 
painfully predominant. It seems that such a tide of world-weariness has come upon the Western 

	  
26	  
world. . . . many, nay most of the cultured men and women there, are already weary of this 
competition, this struggle, this brutality of their commercial civilization, and they are looking 
forward towards something better. . . . They have found out that no amount of political or social 
manipulation of human conditions can cure the evils of life. It is a change of the soul itself for the 
better, that alone will cure the evils of life.43  
The religious civilizations of Christian, Hindu, and Buddhist types emphasized the unfoldment of 
the inner possibilities of man instead of the outer satisfaction of the biological urges. It might be 
construed that they advocated otherworldliness and used religion as an opiate or escape. A deeper 
analysis will prove that any such charge is not true. The religious outlook does not necessarily 
advocate giving up the pursuit of pleasure on the sense plane; it only gives a proper place to the 
different urges. The problem of anxiety arises when any of the urges are out of balance with the 
others and become disproportionate by making man feel inadequate, insecure, and futile. Religious 
philosophy furnishes the background against which the various urges can be balanced. It is 
encouraging to note what Professor O. Hobart Mowrer, a clinical psychologist, has to say about the 
cause and remedy of anxiety:– 
“Many sources of present evidence indicate that most perhaps all neurotic human beings suffer, 
not because they are unduly inhibited as regards their biological drives, but because they have 
disavowed and repudiated their own moral strivings. Anxiety, I believe, comes, not from 
repressed sexuality or pent-up hatred, but from a denial and defiance of the forces of 
conscience.”44  
We knew an elderly gentleman in India who had a struggle in his early life because of family 
bereavements. He was a self-made man, having established himself in a high rank in the legal 
profession. But he never neglected his religious duties and spiritual practices. When his 
grandchildren were born and his older son became his successor in his legal work, he entrusted the 
duties of his family to the son. This, elderly gentleman retired from his worldly activities and 
devoted himself to spiritual practices. It was amazing then and it is still amazing to remember how 
much he grew in spirituality. This was so because he placed worldly achievements and enjoyments 
in a position subordinate to the religious ideal. He had real satisfaction in life and his noble example 
inspired many young persons and children. We never noticed any kind of anxiety in this gentleman 
under any circumstances. The secret of his peaceful state of mind lay in his proper evaluation of life 
and consequent intense spiritual practices in the form of meditation, worship, and other such 
exercises. His life shows also that one does not have to give up or negate the pursuit of pleasure in 
order to be free from anxiety and apprehension; rather one has to set them in proper relation to the 
pursuit of the religious ideal.  
If a man will change his outlook on life and can be convinced that he has latent possibilities for 
happiness in social adjustment and higher spiritual unfoldment, he can eliminate anxiety neuroses 
caused by frustration, insecurity and a sense of guilt. Mentally disturbed persons with anxiety 
neuroses should be helped to understand that they are more than just straws in the mighty current of 
life. They should be taught the latent dynamic possibilities of the human soul. As Swami 
Vivekananda declares: "Each soul is potentially divine." We have seen in many cases that this 
conviction constitutes the starting point of change in the lives of the individuals.  
Mere intellectual conceptions and convictions do not solve the problem of anxiety neurosis. Clients 
should simultaneously be trained in the practice of relaxation, concentration, and meditation, as the 
new conviction of the divinity of man is developed. Those who are not willing to accept this point 
of view can think that they are children of God and, as such, inseparably connected with Him. The 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
43	  Works, III. 181-182. 	  
44	  O.Hobart Mowrer, "Biological vs. Moral Frustration in Personality Disturbances," Progressive Education, XXVI, 
(January, 1949), p. 67.  

	  
27	  
practice of concentration on God brings out the latent power of mind in the form of will power.45 As 
the will is developed by these practices all symptoms of anxiety neuroses vanish. The individuals 
become transformed.  
If we want an idealistic civilization, we must focus the mind on the permanent Reality within us. 
Some may call it God; others may call it Soul. It does not matter what name is given. The point is 
that unless we give attention to that supreme goal of life, to the understanding of the higher self of 
man, there is no possibility of- conquering the lower desires. There are some thinkers, the 
humanists, who hold that ethical development is possible without the thought of God. However, we 
find that it is not normally possible. It is true that humanism of the Buddhist type produced great 
integrated personalities. However, their emphasis was on the eightfold path:  
(1) right belief,  
(2) right aspiration,  
(3) right speech,  
(4) right conduct,  
(5) right mode of livelihood,  
(6) right effort,  
(7) right meditation,  
(8) right realization.  
Consequently, right living was essential on the basis of the higher values of life.  
Even the Buddhists of an earlier period realized that ethical idealism was not practical for the vast 
majority of the people; they put Buddha in the place of God or the all-loving Being out of 
psychological necessity. So we are compelled to think that lower passions cannot be changed unless 
the mind is directed to higher planes of existence. As Buddha says: "The gods even envy him whose 
senses, like horses well broken in by the driver, have been subdued, who is free from pride, and free 
from appetites."46 In the Bhagavad-Gita Sri Krishna says that as long as attention is intensely given 
to sense pleasures, there is no possibility of peace of mind. He gives the warning:– 
"The turbulent senses, O son of Kunti, do violently snatch away the mind of even a wise man, 
striving after perfection";  
and,  
"His wisdom is steady, whose senses are under control."47  
Jesus Christ, in the Sermon on the Mount, declares: "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see 
God."48 The word purity has deep meaning. As long as the mind is scattered and full of waves due 
to inordinate desires and longing, there is no peace. Sri Ramakrishna says that the reflection of one's 
face cannot be seen in the lake if the lake is dirty or full of ripples.49  Neither is there any reflection 
from the mirror which is covered with dust. Similarly, we cannot see the reflection of our soul or 
the real or higher self unless the mind is transparent. When the mind is full of passions and desires, 
there is no possibility for the reflection of God in it. That is the reason that inordinate tendencies 
have to be controlled, in order that a person may achieve the knowledge of the Reality.  
Challenging questions arise. Is the religious attitude toward the senses otherworldly? Does religion 
mean negation of life and the world? One of the great European thinkers, Dr. Albert Schweitzer, 
writes, in his Indian Thought and Its Development, that Oriental religions, particularly Hinduism, 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
45	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1946), chap. V. 	  
46	  Dhammapada, trans. Max Muller, VII: 94. 	  
47	  Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita II: 60-61. 	  
48	  Matt. 5:8 	  
49	  Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna XXXV: 689	  

	  
28	  
follow a method of rejection of life and the world.50 He also does not spare Jesus in this respect. Our 
answer to such critics is that Buddha, Krishna, and Christ did not advocate negation of life and the 
world. What they wanted us to do was to take the world as it really is, not as we would like to have 
it. Vedantic teachers tell us that the world exists, but existence is relative. It is true that every man 
has to live, take care of his body, and have some comforts in life. But it is important that these be 
not overemphasized. If the comforts of the world are considered as paramount, then there will be 
desire or more and more comfort and pleasure. The result will be apprehension and anxiety. 
However, if worldly activities, comforts, enjoyments, and achievements are subordinated to the 
supreme goal of life or knowledge of the inner Self or God, then it is possible to live in the world 
free from anxiety. Those who work will become aware of the value of the enjoyments and 
achievements in life. The value lies in the spirit of service of God in man. The same inner Self or 
God that is in one man is also present in others. Swami Vivekananda tells us to apply the Vedantic 
principle of the oneness of existence in practical living and see God in all, in the husband, wife, 
children, colleagues, and co-workers. Then one can strike at the root of anxiety.  
The conscious change of attitude toward life when carried out in daily activities gradually removes 
the cause of anxiety, no matter how it may be operating in the unconscious mind. Even though the 
change of attitude may be on an intellectual level for the time being, by degrees it penetrates the 
total mind through daily living and spiritual exercises, as we noted in the life of the elderly 
gentleman earlier in this chapter. The unconscious functioning of anxiety can be removed only 
when the contents of the unconscious are changed through the manifestation of constructive, 
harmonious, and dynamic new contents. No matter how dark and discouraging the unconscious 
contents may seem at the moment, they can be transformed by the new conscious and creative 
activity of the mind.51  (This will be elaborated in Chapter XVI.) When the cause of anxiety is 
detected, a person should deliberately cultivate the opposite tendencies to counteract the anxiety, 
whether its cause is biological or emotional. The daily practice of meditation is essential in order to 
strengthen the conviction that man is basically divine.  
 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
50	  Albert Schweitzer, Indian Thought and Its Development (London: Holder & Stoughton Ltd., 1936). 	  
51	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology, chap. VII, "Effect of Meditation." 	  

	  
29	  
CHAPTER 3 
Conquest of Fear 
EAR is one of the troublesome problems of mankind. It is based on the apprehension of 
danger of every type; and it has considerable influence in determining the personality of a 
man. Certain forms of fear are reactions from the primitive instincts self-preservation, self-
expression, sex, and so forth and at a certain stage they can be used for constructive and 
evolutionary purposes. Basically, however, fear is a destructive, dissipating, and discomforting 
tendency.  
Primitive man does not seem to feel that he can cope with the different causes of fear, so he tries to 
escape from it by means of propitiatory processes, such as approaching personified nature and other 
beings to save him from destruction. When a child is born and feels the diversity of experience, he 
cannot easily find himself in homogeneous and harmonious surroundings. He constantly struggles 
for existence. The moment his urge of self-preservation is threatened and the moment he feels the 
possibility of disturbance, he becomes afraid and seeks help. Some thinkers feel that fear is 
associated only with self-preservation. The illustrations given in the previous chapter on anxiety 
indicate that any of the primary urges which are not properly handled will produce fear.  
When a person finds himself inadequate in coping with the problems of life, he develops what is 
generally known as an inferiority complex or fear complex. The sense of inadequacy can often be 
traced to infancy. If the parents do not give love and attention to the growing child, he develops a 
feeling of inferiority and has to struggle for life. The child who is brought up in unhappy or 
disrupted families where the parents are not stabilized will be fearful. He will manifest unusual 
behavior patterns. He cannot behave normally in situations causing suspense and worry about the 
protection of his own life. Again, when the behavior of one or both parents is unpredictable, a child 
shows considerable inferiority and becomes timid in facing the world. He does not develop any 
certainty in his life, behavior, and expressions in a social situation. When he grows up, he wants to 
assert himself; but he cannot find his legitimate place in the struggle for existence because of his 
own defect, which was created either by wrong training in the family or by a hostile society.  
Hostility is, often felt and expressed in a competitive society where the members have to fight for 
their position and success, and their suspicion is aroused lest someone else defeat them. The wrong 
attitude of such a child creates abnormality in his behavior. When he faces society, he has a kind of 
predisposition of fear toward it because of the insecurity of earlier days. Either the child has not 
received proper love, care, or attention from the mother or there have been disturbances in the lives 
of the parents. Consequently he faces constant apprehension, and when the time comes for him to 
meet the greater world society he has a tendency to be afraid and nervous. He feels inferior in his 
struggle for assimilation into society. Because of that sense of insecurity, he behaves in an anti-
social manner. He does not find his place in the community. He cannot express himself properly. 
He cannot find a normal life with other human beings. With his predisposition toward inferiority, he 
antagonizes others, but he does not think that he is to be blamed. He feels that society is unkind and 
is denying him his rightful place.  
As an illustration, consider the case of a person who was brought up in a family where the father's 
behavior was unpredictable. He was a normal child with a fairly well developed intellect. Because 
of his father's roughness and unpredictable conduct, conditions in the family were always uncertain. 
The father would often play with the child, and in the course of the play his own emotional 
instability would upset him. The games invariably ended in a state of serious tension. The little 
child could not be sure how the games and other recreational activities with his father would 
culminate. When he became an adolescent and was faced with the association of teen-age children 
F 

	  
30	  
he could not behave in a normal manner. He remained shy, developing a feeling of inferiority, and 
he always sought the company of persons inferior to him in order to have the satisfaction of 
expressing his personality. As a result, he never developed into a mature person who could 
associate with people of mentalities equal or superior to his own. He gradually restricted his circle 
of friends so that he became almost an egocentric introvert. His social qualities remained 
undeveloped and neurotic tendencies made their appearance. To overcome some of his anti-social 
attitudes and consequent frustration he turned to drinking. The patience and endurance of the 
mother greatly encouraged the young person. Medical help also contributed to his improvement. 
Deep sympathy and love, shown in the attitude of the religious- teacher, helped him immensely, 
too. Counseling was deliberately non-aggressive and non-directive, lest the young person imagine 
that he was being guided by anyone and thus become defensive. Religious help enabled this person 
to become fairly normal with the expectation of further change and improvement. If this type of 
religious therapy can be continued, he will be even more stabilized.  
The instance of a certain young man indicates similar causation. Brought up in a disharmonious 
family where the parents had nothing in common, he withdrew from the normal activities of a child 
in social situations. He developed an inferiority complex due to the fears of early childhood which 
were brought on by the unsatisfactory parent-child relationship in an unhappy home. This sense of 
inferiority remained with him even when he became an adult and had a fairly good position in life, 
thus affecting his interpersonal relationships. He is gradually becoming sociable and is overcoming 
his inferiority complex through his association with a patient religious teacher. The teacher does not 
allow this young man to feel that he is being instructed in any way. He is rather influencing the 
young man through a process of non-interference coupled with affection.  
Another young man was forced by his father to take up engineering which was the father's 
profession. He did not feel capable of following in the footsteps of his father who was a  successful 
engineer. This created a fear of failure which gave him an inferiority complex. When he later 
changed his type of work, his neurotic tendencies vanished and he became a normal and happy 
person. He could not have success in life until he adopted the kind of work that suited his inherent 
ability and nature and gave him satisfaction. 
 It is natural for the adolescent to revolt against the ideas and teachings of his parents and society in 
the majority of cultural patterns. He does not understand that he has to adapt himself to this new 
and larger environment. If he has a sense of inferiority, he will express himself in a manner which 
will antagonize others. He does not realize that his life will be stable and he can have normal outlets 
of expression if he can only understand his place in the greater scheme of life. Therefore, he is 
fearful. There is an amazingly high percentage of adolescents in the West, especially in America, 
who show the effect of fear or inferiority. When the fearful young person tries to establish himself 
in the world he becomes unpopular; and the more unpopular he is the more his sense of inferiority 
becomes a factor in his behavior pattern. He is in a vicious circle. When he antagonizes others with 
his aggression, they react in an antagonistic manner. Then he becomes more aggressive and they in 
turn become more aggressive. In this way the individual, as well as friends, relatives, and society 
become unhappy.  
There are various types of fear. One is based on the desire for physical stability, perpetuation of life, 
or health. Physical fear arises from a sense of insecurity and inadequacy. It can be removed by 
meeting physical requirements and through proper vocational training. A person should understand 
that he is not inferior or superior because of his vocation or the profession he adopts. Every man has 
his own place in the scheme of society. It is a mistake to think that those who occupy some 
positions are superior beings. A well organized society enables the different members to perform 
their respective duties and work according to their inherent tendencies. A society which emphasizes 
the superiority of some functions will create a great number of persons with feelings of inferiority. 

	  
31	  
It is the duty of teachers and religious leaders to convince the average man and woman that their 
ways of living are not inferior. Every citizen should strengthen his own conviction in this respect in 
order to become a happy member of society. People may be different from one another; yet each 
can contribute his own quota to the well being of the community at large. Fear caused by physical 
and vocational differences can, in many instances, be removed successfully by the attitude that each 
is great in his own place.52 There is no such thing as a superior race. The superiority we see in a 
given group exists because of the opportunities available for its cultivation.  
A similar attitude should be taken by the people who have intellectual and emotional fear and a 
sense of inferiority, as human beings also differ from each other intellectually and emotionally. 
Parents, teachers, and religious leaders should never use disparaging, discouraging terms such as: 
"You can't do that," "You are slow," "You are awkward." Swami Vivekananda used to condemn the 
use of the expression "don't." It degrades a person and gives him a feeling of fear and inferiority. 
There are many cases of emotional fear which are based on physical strain and injury; in fact, 
repulsion in emotional expression is generally due to early physical pain. Emotional fear can be 
eliminated by sympathetic understanding, patience, and loving attention.  
The third form of fear is spiritual. In Chapter II, the case of the little girl illustrated how the sense of 
sin can paralyze a person. Man has weaknesses and sinful tendencies, but it is a mistake to 
overemphasize these.  
True understanding of religion does not create fear. On the contrary, it removes the basis for fear as 
we begin to understand that we are "children of God" and that "the Kingdom of God" is within us. 
Swami Vivekananda says:– 
Strength is goodness, weakness is sin. . . . And the only religion that ought to be taught, is the 
religion of fearlessness. Either in this world or in the world of religion, it is true that fear is the 
sure cause of degradation and sin. . . . And what causes fear? Ignorance of our own nature. Each 
of us is heir-apparent to the Emperor of Emperors; we are of the substance of God Himself.53  
The best method for overcoming fear is emphasis on the positive side of religion and conviction 
that we are inseparably connected with God as a mine of strength. In doing this, we not only can 
refute the statements of the critics of religion but we also can stabilize our own and others' lives. In 
many cases we have seen that when persons begin to cultivate this spirit of religion their lives are 
changed; fear and neuroses vanish; behavior becomes normal; and gradually these persons become 
sources of strength and inspiration to others.  
The three types of fear can be overcome by cultivating our higher spiritual consciousness. Swami 
Vivekananda tells us to live, preach, and teach the gospel of strength. First it must be lived before it 
can be taught. It is not a physical science which is demonstrated in the laboratory. It is purely 
subjective or mental, yet it has tangible results. The subjective or mental change can take place only 
when it is initiated by a man who has integrated himself. The man who lives tile life of strength can 
alone demonstrate its value to others. But the inner source of strength cannot be measured or known 
from its physical results.  
Let us clarify what we mean by strength. The majority of the people think that when they express 
physical force they are strong. To be sure, they are physically strong; but they make a great blunder 
when they want to establish their position in life through physical force. This mistaken idea has 
been perpetuated for centuries, and the result has been disastrous. We know from the study of 
history that people have been destroying themselves and each other because they have 
misconceived strength as physical force. Physical force will always create conflict because it is 
limiting. There is no possibility of unity on the physical plane.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
52	  "Karma Yoga," Works, I. 	  
53	  Works, III, 160. 	  

	  
32	  
The same is true of the intellectual and emotional planes of existence. There is a vast difference in 
the intellectual conceptions and emotional reactions of people. No two persons will react in the 
same way to the same experience. The presence of a particular man will inspire some people to give 
everything for the good of humanity while the appearance of that man will antagonize others. We 
know from historical accounts how the great spiritual personalities were loved by some and hated 
by others. It has happened in the lives of all outstanding spiritual personalities.  
Unity is possible only on the spiritual plane. When a man realizes his true nature, his divine Self, 
his soul, then he finds unity of existence. To illustrate this we can refer to some of the mystical 
experiences of Sri Ramakrishna. He realized the Oneness of existence in such a way that He could 
feel the presence of the Divine Being in every living thing. He felt on His own body the pressure of 
men's feet on blades of grass. He felt the beating given to a bullock and the marks appeared on His 
back. He felt the pain of these things because of His realization of the one divine Reality. Similar 
experiences have been known by other great personalities. Buddha identified Himself with the 
whole universe and that is the reason He offered His life to save one lamb. When a man realizes 
that state of union with the spiritual plane of existence, he completely removes the cause of fear.  
Fear is paralyzing our social system. It is destroying the stability of human minds today. In the 
struggle between labor and management, between the Anglo-Americans and Russians, it is a serious 
factor, acute and dangerous. The Russians are afraid of Anglo-Americans and the Anglo-Americans 
are afraid of the Russians. Labor is afraid of management and management is afraid of labor. The 
colored Americans are afraid of the white Americans and the white Americans are afraid of the 
colored. Jews are afraid of Christians and Christians are afraid of Jews. The Hindus are afraid of the 
Muslims and the Muslims are afraid of the Hindus. The British fear the rise of the Hindu 
civilization and the Hindus fear the British lest they again try to create a situation to perpetuate their 
domination in India. There is some justification for these international and inter-racial fears, but 
they are chiefly caused by ignorance of the real nature of man on the part of all. Americans are 
afraid of Russians because they are ignorant of the true nature of the Russians. Jews are ignorant of 
the true nature of the Christians, and so it goes. On this relative plane the differences will persist.  
The realization of the divinity of man in the oneness of existence becomes the true solution of the 
problem of fear. Fear cannot be overcome on the physical plane. The body will deteriorate and die. 
No matter how much a person loves his body, it will eventually have to go. The body cannot be 
perpetuated indefinitely. So why cling to it and anything concerning it only to create more 
disturbance for ourselves and others? The great teachers of the world tell us that realization, 
understanding, or even a glimpse of the divine Oneness will banish all forms of fear. The conquest 
of fear can only be attained by applying the principle of unity in life. Mere intellectual conception 
of this principle will not solve the problem. There are many philosophers who will tell us that there 
is one existence. Yet they betray their ignorance of the true meaning of unity in their personal 
behavior. The behavior pattern must be changed with the awareness of that oneness. The moment 
that state of awareness is experienced, that very moment all the Different forms of fear will vanish 
from consciousness.  
While it is true that at first one must have intellectual understanding of oneness, in spite of the 
outward physical, mental, and spiritual differences, this alone does not solve the problem of fear. 
One has to work it out in interpersonal relationships and to bring out one's mental power through 
constant cultivation of this thought. As a man thinks, so he becomes. Practical experience leads to 
the conclusion that the cause of fear should be squarely faced and overcome. An example is seen in 
the young boy who was afraid of departed souls. When he was about fifteen years old, some of his 
friends found out about his apprehensions and advised him to visit a spot reputed to be frequented 
by such beings. He followed their advice and gradually overcame his fear of ghosts. In many cases 
of fear, individuals are encouraged to do the very things that create nervousness and other forms of 

	  
33	  
mental disturbance. As they succeed in their attempts, they gradually gain confidence in 
themselves.  
There was a young man who was constantly told by friends and relatives that he was good for 
nothing; he would not be able to achieve anything in life. For some reason, in the back of his mind 
he had a feeling that he would be able to accomplish something. His spiritual teacher always trusted 
and believed in him to the extent of telling him that he would attain the highest spiritual realization 
within a short time. These inspiring words actually brought out the best in the young man and he 
has been doing many noble things in his life and in his interpersonal relationships.  
In another instance, a young man was told by many of his friends that he had no manliness or 
courage. Even though he was intelligent, he was always discouraged by men of higher position. The 
result was disastrous. However, through the spiritual outlook on life and the inspiration of his 
spiritual teacher, as well as encouragement from some of his friends, he gradually developed self-
confidence. As he practiced certain exercises like concentration and meditation he acquired new 
conviction. His fear vanished and he began to do creative and constructive work.  
So, emphasis on spiritual strength, cultivation of conviction, facing the issues of life, and 
performance of spiritual practices can bring out the divine fire in man; and, thereby, he can 
overcome all forms of fear mental, physical, and spiritual. Hence, the basic ideas of religion, instead 
of creating fear, develop the dynamic power of the mind and remove it.  
 

	  
34	  
CHAPTER 4 
Conquest of Frustration 
VERYONE is trying to attain something, whether it is money, power, position, a home, or a 
family. But the vast majority do not have a definite plan or a real objective in life. They live 
a life of impulses. As the impulses arise they try to satisfy them. So they are not in a position 
to think about the methods for attaining an objective. They are drifting, so to speak, in the river of 
life. They go here and there as their impulses impel them. Consequently, they experience constant 
disappointment, conflict, and frustration. Toward the evening of life they realize that they did not 
gain what they wanted happiness.  
Everyone in this world is eager to be happy. Their activities indicate that this is their desire. 
Whether a person is black, white, yellow, or brown, whether he is cultured or uncultured, Hindu or 
Christian, short or tall, man or woman, he wants happiness. It is the basic urge of man. Those who 
are thoughtful try to find out the nature of happiness, the objective of life, and the method of 
attaining it. In primitive society man seeks to be happy by fulfilling physical requirements and by 
getting satisfaction through expressions of his physical nature. In a higher state of evolution man is 
not satisfied with physical existence. His intellect is developed and he tries to find satisfaction on 
the intellectual plane. He follows creative, intellectual, and aesthetic pursuits, even though he still 
has physical gratification. At this stage he realizes that physical requirements are not the whole of 
existence. When he reaches a still higher plane of development, he feels that he must satisfy his 
spiritual nature. He knows that this cannot be done until and unless his physical nature is 
subordinated to that ideal. On whatever plane an individual may be functioning he wants to have 
satisfaction and avoid the pain of frustration and disappointment. Whenever he thinks that he is 
likely to be disappointed he becomes apprehensive and fearful. Like fear, frustration creates a great 
deal of disturbance both in the mind and body of man. It also creates neurotic and psychotic 
behavior.  
Frustration is associated with the failure of any of the primary urges. Man dislikes it in any form as 
it is a negation of happiness which he is seeking constantly in one of the three realms of existence 
physical, mental, or spiritual.  
There have been many cases of frustration even in children. A young woman reported to us that 
when she was a. little girl, her mother poured out her affection to an older brother. The little girl 
was considerably neglected and she became frustrated. This colored her behavior pattern later on in 
her married life. Unfortunately, the marriage was disrupted because of the behavior of her husband 
and she manifested many neurotic symptoms.  
There is the case of the scholar who was under the influence of his mother. When he became an 
adult he had an important job in an educational institution. He felt strongly that he wanted to 
express himself but his sense of duty at his mature age did not allow him to do what he really 
wished. When the second World War came along he became anxious to get away and join the Navy 
so that he would be independent of his mother and his childhood associations. His early frustration 
affected him in such a way that he lost his mental balance and finally had to be admitted to a mental 
hospital.  
We also know of a young man who lived with a much older sister after the death of his parents. 
Several times he wanted to get married to girls with whom he fell in love, but each time that his 
sister knew about it she threatened to commit suicide if he left her. This went on for years. Finally, 
in order to avoid further frustration and dissatisfaction in life he took to drinking.  
E 

	  
35	  
Various attempts have been made to overcome the causes of frustration. The hedonists believe in 
the greatest amount of pleasure on the sense plane for the attainment of happiness. They try to 
prove that sense pleasure is the primary objective because man is constantly seeking it. If you do 
not give the greatest amount of pleasure to man, they say, he will be invariably in trouble. And if he 
cannot attain it himself he will be disappointed and frustrated and suffer from all kinds of functional 
ailments. Many of the Grecian thinkers came to the conclusion that the greatest amount of pleasure 
was man's objective. Intellectual pursuit, philosophy, science, and other intellectual disciplines, 
even religion, must be subordinated to pleasure. Poetry, literature, art, and painting were to be used 
for pleasure. After the fall of Constantinople and the post-Renaissance period, the civilization of the 
West tenaciously accepted the views of the hedonists of old Greece. Bacon, Hobbes, Mill, Bentham, 
and all such thinkers emphasized the greatest amount of pleasure as the primary objective of life. As 
they were deep thinkers, they seemed to realize that this pursuit of pleasure should not be limited to 
the individual; the greatest amount of pleasure should be given to the greatest number of people. 
But they forgot one thing; they did not take the whole of human nature into consideration.  
Why should a man want to give the greatest amount of pleasure to the greatest number? When the 
elements of pleasure are analyzed, we find that the most satisfaction, however temporary it may be, 
is derived through the senses. It is the most intense and satisfying when concentrated on one's self. 
When it is diffused it is much less keenly satisfying. On the basis of these facts we do not see why a 
person should not increase his own pleasure at the cost of others, if the attainment of pleasure on the 
sense plane remains the primary objective of life. The Indian Charvakas and some Greeks were 
logical in their conclusions eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die because pleasure was 
their objective.  
The majority of the people today, in the Eastern and Western hemispheres, are consciously or 
unconsciously trying to get the greatest amount of sense pleasure. If we analyze the time and energy 
that are given to the activities of life, we find that they are motivated by the search for pleasure. It 
does not matter whether a person is a scientist, philosopher, or literary man, he is impelled by this 
desire. Even religion is subordinated to pleasure. There are religious groups who promise health, 
bodily comfort, and so forth. Humanism tries to remove some of the evil that is produced by greed, 
selfishness, and love of power, so that the greatest number of people can get the greatest amount of 
pleasure. Humanists have introduced many good things like social justice, social security, 
progressive legislation, and "liberalism" in politics, commerce, and trade. They have tried to make 
those social gains so that man can have pleasure and happiness on the sense plane for a longer time, 
even when he is incapable of earning. But is this solving the problem of frustration?  
All these progressive laws, humanistic ideas of scientists and philosophers are bound to fail while 
there is still the desire for more and more pleasure. It is inevitable that as long as the greatest 
amount of pleasure is the goal of life, frustration or apprehension will remain in the mind.  
While the mind has the desire for more and more, the body is not always fit to satisfy the desire; 
consequently, the mind is upset and frustrated. The body has its limitations; it wears out and 
becomes old. This is its nature. When a person gets beyond middle age the body begins to decline. 
At this stage frustration is likely to arise if a person wants to prolong satisfaction merely on the 
sensory plane. People often commit suicide because their lives are empty in later years. The mind 
also deteriorates to some extent unless a person is established in the higher principles of life. It 
becomes weaker as the body declines and the nerves become debilitated. The body and mind have a 
close connection in those who are not integrated on the basis of higher spiritual development. In 
those who are thus integrated, the mind supports and guides the body.  
Sri Krishna says in the Bhagavad-Gita that sense pleasure is achieved when there is harmonious 
contact between the senses and the object of the senses. Let us suppose that a man's objective is to 
occupy a great social position. When his senses are working in harmony so that he can reach that 

	  
36	  
goal, then he has the greatest amount of pleasure in it. The same is true in family) life when the 
intimate marital relationship is properly adjusted If anyone wants to be an outstanding philosopher 
and his mind and senses permit him to work for it, then he attains the greatest amount of pleasure. If 
someone wishes to be a great scientist and works hard to reach his objective, he, too, gets the 
maximum of pleasure.  
When several persons are trying to get the same material thing, the spirit of competition enters the 
picture. That is what happens in a society where pleasure is the goal. Individuals and groups not 
only compete with each other but nations also do the same. Wars are conflicts between the haves 
and have-nots. Some nations establish empires; others do not but wish to establish them. The old 
thieves, as Senator Borah said, fight with the new thieves.  
Many psychotherapists believe in the sublimation and substitution of the primitive urges of sex and 
self-expression by directing the emotions into creative and intellectual fields. They have had 
considerable success in certain types of cases. However, even intellectual and aesthetic ideals can 
be swept away by the primitive urges if the latter are regarded as the sole aim of human life. So 
these remedies seem to be ameliorative rather than curative, while the goal of life remains 
hedonistic. A person does not find permanent satisfaction on the physical plane because of the 
changeable quality of the objects of enjoyment and the instruments of enjoyment.  
In India a person is urged to cultivate the faculty of discrimination and analyze the nature of 
frustration and its causes. Some thinkers seem to feel that the more an individual cultivates the 
quality of discrimination and self-analysis, the more the mental state of frustration is resolved, as 
advocated by the psychoanalysts. Freud and many of his followers believe that in the very process 
of psychoanalysis the mind is stabilized. However, we have seen many cases where the people 
involved underwent psychoanalysis for long periods of time yet could not overcome the effect of 
frustration.  
A professional man was analyzed by a prominent psychoanalyst in one of the larger cities of New 
England. He went to the analyst once a week for a number of years. Unfortunately, this man could 
not overcome his dissatisfaction in spite of analysis and an understanding of the cause of his 
problems. Religious counseling based on higher values of life and mental training as well as 
frequent association with a spiritual teacher immensely helped this man. Unfortunately, due to 
certain circumstances, this association had to be broken and the man suffered a set-back. As a result 
of observing  this man and a number of other individuals we are convinced that a long period of 
encouragement and advice are important for a permanent change, along with individual spiritual 
exercises which will be discussed in Chapters XIV and XVI.  
The human mind is peculiar. It will not give up anything unless it has something else to take its 
place. Suppose that a person likes and eats a great deal of candy. The doctor advises him against it 
because he has an acid condition which the candy aggravates. But the person often cannot give it up 
as long as the doctor does not prescribe anything to take its place. In the same way, if the mind is to 
give up sense pleasure as the whole of life, then something higher than that must be given to it for 
mental satisfaction. A vacuum does not give satisfaction. Discrimination or analysis are of no avail 
unless the mind can have some satisfaction. If the mind does not find satisfaction in one way, it will 
seek another. By this we do not mean what many Western psychiatrists consider as substitution on 
the same plane of existence. What we advocate is a thorough change in the outlook on life. Rules, 
regulations, laws, or advice will not change a person. Sri Krishna says in the Bhagavad-Gita that a 
man works because of his inner urges or nature. Unless the inner nature is changed, true satisfaction 
will not be found.  
The present outlook on life which created the sensate civilization of the West, as Professor Sorokin 
tells us, will not solve the problem. He writes:– 

	  
37	  
 If a person has no strong convictions as to what is right and what is wrong, if he does not believe 
in any God or absolute moral values, if he no longer respects contractual obligations, and, finally, 
if his hunger for pleasures and sensory values is paramount, what can guide and control his 
conduct toward other men? Nothing but his desires and lusts. Under these conditions he loses all 
rational and moral control, even plain common sense. What can deter him from violating the 
rights, interests, and well-being of other men? Nothing but physical force. How far will he go in 
his insatiable quest for sensory happiness? He will go as far as brute force, opposed by that of 
others, permits.54  
He also refers to the "hollowness of sensate culture, the hopelessness of further allegiance to sensate 
values, and the impossibility of attempting to preserve an orderly way of life on so rotten a 
foundation."55  
A high percentage of people in this country are suffering from mental ailments. The United States is 
the wealthiest country in the world with the highest standard of living. Why should there be 
frustration here? Because people are constantly seeking more and more pleasure, just as children 
can be heard to say: "Morel More!"  
As we read in the Upanishads, our ideal is to seek bliss not pleasure. There is a world of difference 
between bliss and pleasure. Pleasure is limited to the sense plane and bliss is above and beyond it. 
Bliss can be attained only when we become aware of our true nature. The attempts of humanists, 
psychiatrists, social scientists and other social philosophers are bound to fail if they cannot change 
man's ideal. So long as hedonism remains the ideal or primary objective of life, there will be 
frustration. The only way to overcome frustration is to remember that the true ideal of life is the 
realization 'and understanding of the higher self or God.  
People can be persuaded to change their philosophy of life, not by dogmatic theology, but by a 
broadened interpretation of religion. One day we were talking to an intellectual. He said: "I am an 
ardent naturalist." We asked him: "Are you willing to accept that your individuality is a part of the 
whole?" He replied: "Oh, yes." That is what starts to solve the problem. The whole can be called 
anything that a person wishes. It need not necessarily be called God; it can be referred to as "force" 
or any such name. The point is that a person should for the time being conceive that he is a part of, 
or product of, that whole. From this beginning he can grow on the spiritual plane. If he is a devotee, 
he thinks that he is a child of God, as St. Paul says. When we critically try to understand the nature 
of the whole, we are compelled to come to the conclusion that the whole is permanent and abiding. 
Professor Schrodinger concludes:– 
 The only possible alternative is simply to keep to the immediate experience that consciousness is 
a singular of which the plural is unknown; that there is only one thing and that, what seems to be 
a plurality, is merely a series of different aspects of this one thing, produced by a deception (the 
Indian MAYA) ….. 56 
Buddha emphasizes understanding of the truth as the primary objective of life. Sri Krishna 
emphasizes knowledge of the Atman or soul, Reality or God. In the Upanishads we find that the 
primary objective is the search for bliss or joy which cannot be limited to the sense plane. "Having 
attained this joy, (man) becomes blessed."57 When anyone proceeds in a search for bliss, he 
becomes satisfied. He attains a state of mind which dissolves frustration. When anyone takes an 
interest in spiritual practices, peace and satisfaction arise in his mind. Persons are satisfied when 
they go through spiritual discipline. When one intensifies spiritual practices, knowing the objective 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
54	  Pitirim A. Sorokin, The Crisis of Our Age (New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1944), p. 205.	  
55	  Ibid p. 323	  
56	  Erwin Schrödinger, What is Life? (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1947), p.90. 	  
57	  "Brahmananda Valli," Taittirya Upanishad, chap. VII.  
	  

	  
38	  
of life, one's mind not only becomes peaceful and quiet but it goes through a tremendous change, a 
transformation. When the mind becomes quiet the nerves become strong. The people seek help 
from outside sources but they do nothing about their difficulties themselves. They created their own 
difficulties. They can remove them.  
A person should first change his outlook with spiritual understanding and then try to reach the goal 
by regulating his daily activities under the ideal. By this process he will become happy and 
peaceful. Often people argue that this will make them otherworldly, but that is not necessarily so. 
Have the pleasures of life but do not make them the primary objective. One should subordinate 
them to the abiding bliss which is in the spiritual plane. New revelations, new experiences, new joy, 
come to a man in this realization. Then he is full of bliss all the time. Nothing can stop that flow of 
bliss once it has been started. Age, physical conditions, political and economic conditions, do not 
disturb a person who is established in that bliss. He has a treasure that no thief can steal, no dictator 
can usurp, that he cannot help but give and give and give. There is always more, not less, to give 
when he does so. It is with him all of the time. There is no disappointment, frustration, unhappiness. 
He who has conquered frustration can give happiness to others.  
 

	  
39	  
CHAPTER 5 
Forgiveness or Aggression 
NE of the important factors in the study of human behavior is aggression. This mental state 
is generally associated with frustration, fear, and a sense of inferiority. In fact, many 
psychologists and psychiatrists have observed that aggression is not only closely related to 
these tendencies but it is generally preceded and succeeded by them. They often cause an extreme 
form of aggression in human behavior pattern. The germ of aggression is already in man in the form 
of natural self-expression and self-assertion. One does not have to go to a psychiatrist to discover 
that it is present in all human beings, implicitly or explicitly. When we observe the behavior of a 
child in infancy, we can trace this biological urge in him.  
There is no denying that aggression exists among others than children. It is even in plants and 
creepers which raise themselves up and break the ground. It exists in the animal kingdom. There is 
a struggle for life and expression in everyone. If a person follows this natural tendency, he becomes 
aggressive. In handling social problems, friends, relatives, associates, people become aggressive. It 
is natural. Now the question is: Are people to be aggressive in a way that is natural, or should they 
follow in the footsteps of Jesus or other great spiritual leaders? This is a serious issue. Although the 
Western world is supposed to be nurtured by the Christian ideal, are the majority of the people 
following the path which Jesus laid out for them individually and collectively?  
In social problems or interpersonal relationships we find that few persons are really trying to follow 
in the footsteps of Jesus or to live according to His saying: "Blessed are the meek: for they shall 
inherit the earth” We do not know anyone who has no problems in life. Every single soul is 
different from every other soul in human society. Naturally, each person wants to express himself. 
Consequently, there is a clash and conflict even with those who are intimately related. Children 
think that parents want to dominate their lives. They say to themselves: "Why should we not live 
our own lives? Our parents lived the way they wanted to, and why should they impose their ideas 
on us?" But when the children grow older they try to impose their ideas on their parents. They think 
the parents should do as they wish them to do. It is peculiar how children almost unconsciously take 
revenge on their parents by controlling them, when the parents are past fifty. There are innumerable 
situations of this type. We know a family of moderate means. They have an only child who is now 
grown and working in industry. She invariably tries to manage everything in the life of her parents, 
with whom she lives. The aggressive spirit has become so strong that she treats her parents almost 
as if they were children and tries to impose her ideas on them even in their intimate life. Her 
aggressive spirit and frustration make this young woman extremely neurotic and she indulges in 
narcotics and alcohol to relieve her mental and nervous tension. Unfortunately, few people can 
observe objectively their own aggression because they are so mixed up in it themselves.  
The relationship between husband and wife is delicate and noble. Yet we find that there is serious 
conflict between them. Many people, when they observe this, are afraid to enter matrimony because 
they are not sure how they will get along. Many young men and women have a friendly relationship 
with their beloved. They often prolong their courtship for years in the expectation, on the part of 
one or the other, of ultimate marriage. They do not have the actual ceremony of marriage because of 
the fear of incompatibility due to egocentric aggression. The result is invariably disaster. 
Sometimes one party and often both become the victims of neurosis and psychosis. This fear of an 
unsuccessful marriage is disturbing the social structure of this country and making many persons 
unhappy. In certain cases there are elements of economic insecurity and interference from parents 
and others; but the majority of cases of this type are affected by egocentric aggression. It is a 
serious situation which only religion can effectively overcome.  
O 

	  
40	  
When we consider aggression in social, economic, or racial problems, we find that it plays a great 
part in disturbing group minds. The last two wars were fought because of such conflicts of interest. 
The conflict still exists so there is no possibility of early peace, unless something miraculous 
happens, which is not likely in this world of relativity. We have every reason to believe that 
national or international activities will not be straightened out for some time. Some people are 
frightened by the situation in the United States and Europe. We were told by a French friend that 
passports are being withheld from the citizens of France. It seems that weak people and those of 
moderate means are trying to get out of France because they are afraid lest they lose everything 
through Communism. So the government has become particular about allowing the people to leave 
the country.  
Everywhere there is instability and uncertainty. No one knows what may be awaiting him. There is 
a lack of understanding of human nature and of spiritual ideals everywhere. We cannot say that the 
Western world alone is responsible; all other parts of the world are involved. The wave of 
aggression has touched even the shores of India. A report from India indicates that the same spirit 
of aggression is present among the educated boys and girls, who feel that the religious ideal is 
keeping them under subjugation. The same idea is being expressed by young Chinese people. While 
many Western people cannot settle their own problems, they nevertheless tell the Asians that if they 
took up the ideal of non-aggression, they would attain the Kingdom of God. This is true not only of 
missionaries but also of political leaders like the Earl of Ronaldshay, Marquis of Zetland, who 
expressed his views in The Heart of Aryavarta.58 He was a strong advocate of the religious method 
for India, while England took care of her political affairs. The motive was probably not so altruistic 
as it appeared.  
When we consider the racial problems of the world, we cannot help thinking that aggression 
produces more and more aggression. The aggressive spirit of the West has dominated the Asiatic 
countries and has caused discrimination against Asiatic people. Reports from Oriental countries 
indicate not only that they are tired of the aggressive expressions of the West, but also that they 
themselves are developing strong repulsion and aggression of mind, if not always of action. A 
number of years ago, we noticed this in the pre-war Japanese, in their dealing with "white" races. 
Everywhere from Aden to Shanghai, Asiatic people could not leave the boat until the white people 
had had the opportunity to do so. Japan was the only country in which the Asians were not the 
victims of such discrimination. In the other Oriental countries there was discrimination against even 
the inhabitants, as in India during the days of imperial Britain's reign. Similar discrimination against 
Germans on the part of the occupying forces has been observed by many Americans.  
The racial problems of the white and dark Americans and the so-called Aryans and Semites are also 
due in part to aggression on the part of one or the other of these groups. When anyone of these races 
is persistently discriminated against, the group which is the victim generally develops a counter-
aggression in the course of time. Unfortunately, the aggressive spirit of the victims is generally 
condemned by the original aggressors, who do not realize that they have caused the expression of 
anti-social, egocentric behavior patterns.  
This is the situation. What can be done about it? On one side we see that this aggression is 
destroying the structure of human society in collective as well as individual life. If the higher ideal 
of life is not developed, the disturbance cannot be stopped. We find that aggression or self-assertion 
creates anxiety, worry, apprehension with the consequence that the mind is disintegrated and the 
body is affected.  
A lady with a dental problem came to one of our lectures in a large city recently. She had been to a 
number of dentists and none of them found anything wrong. The toothache, however, was painful 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
58	  Earl of Ronaldshay, The Heart of Aryavarta (London: Constable & Co., Ltd., 1925) 	  

	  
41	  
and would not stop. From her appearance and the manner in which she told us that the dentists 
could not do anything for her, the cause was evident. Her difficulty was mental not physical. The 
toothache was a functional ailment and the dentists could not help her because the remedy suitable 
for this situation was integration of mind. Eventually, she went to a religious teacher for mental 
training. Under his guidance she went through spiritual exercises and gained mental poise. As a 
consequence, her functional troubles were arrested, and she continued with this method of training.  
A few years ago, the Boston Dispensary conducted an experiment on three hundred cases of 
individuals suffering with functional disorders, such as toothache and headache. They did not give 
any medicine; an empty syringe was used; but many of the physical irritations and disturbances 
were stopped, some of them permanently, by this treatment. Others were ameliorated for the time 
being over a period of weeks and months, according to the mental condition of the individuals. 
Such methods, however, deal with symptoms and not with inner spiritual causes.  
In order to handle the deeper elements of aggression in the human mind, we have to study it as it 
develops during infancy. When children are brought up in disharmonious and conflicting family 
life, they always remain insecure, as we stated in the previous chapter. They try to compensate for 
the sense of insecurity in the form of self-assertion. Then again, disturbed parents in their own 
insecurity try to dominate the children. They often carelessly or thoughtlessly use the expression 
"do not" for almost everything the children express. Any child brought up in such an environment is 
constantly frustrated and discouraged in its normal expression of creative activities and harmless 
play. He gradually develops a strong spirit of aggression. Over-pampered children also show 
aggression in their behavior pattern. There is a world of difference between leading a child to 
constructive and creative functioning and dictating to him to do or not to do something. Dictation or 
compulsion generally create repulsion and aggression in the victim. We have seen how children 
who are victims of parental disturbances develop an extreme form of aggression. It may be directed 
to one or both parents, to schoolmates, or playmates. These aggressive children gradually develop 
thoughtlessness, inconsiderateness, selfishness, and egocentricity. These patterns of behavior make 
them unpopular and anti-social. Gradually they try to compensate for their unpopularity by 
becoming more and more aggressive, which leads them ultimately to neurosis or psychosis. 
Sometimes they also develop severe depression and dejection, which results in a serious psychosis.  
It has been observed that parental jealousy impels one of the parents to cater to the child and give 
indulgence to its childhood impulses. The child instinctively realizes the conflict between the 
parents and the reason for the indulgences. He begins to develop symptoms of aggression and an 
egocentric personality. This tendency grows as the child enters adolescence. He becomes unpopular 
with his friends and he cannot adjust himself in the larger sphere of life society. The parents often 
do not realize how much they are responsible for the disintegrating tendencies in their own children. 
They are offended by them and they grieve when the children develop neuroses or psychoses. We 
know of a father who indulged his two young daughters as a means of working against their mother. 
The older girl, about ten or twelve years of age, showed that she was considerably influenced by 
this when her parents were divorced. She gave testimony in court which permitted her to remain 
with her father. Later on, the young girl realized the injustice she had done to her mother. This 
thought and her subsequent behavior created a serious breakdown which led to hospitalization.  
The aggression which we observe is really based on egocentricity and selfishness. Buddha was a 
living example of His words: "For hatred does not cease by hatred at any time: hatred ceases by 
love, this is an old rule."59 In the Isha Upanishad we read: "The wise man who perceives all beings 
as not distinct from his own Self at all, and his own Self as the Self of every being, he does not, by 
virtue of that perception, hate anyone."60 Even though people may be destructive and harmful, we 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
59	  Dhammapada, trans. Max Muller, I: 5. 	  
60	  Isha Upanishad, verse 6. 	  

	  
42	  
must forgive them. A glorious incident took place in the life of Chaitanya many centuries ago. He is 
regarded as an incarnate spirit in India.  
When He was training His disciples in spirituality, two neighbors Jagai and Madhai became 
extremely incensed. It was as if they could not stand the spiritual atmosphere of this holy man and 
His disciples. They were drunkards and addicted to all sorts of vices. One day, it so happened that. 
Chaitanya and His intimate followers went out of their place singing hymns spiritually to inspire the 
people of that vicinity. Jagai and Madhai became infuriated and ran after them throwing stones and 
abusing them to the extent that Chaitanya and His disciples were injured. Chaitanya was in an 
exalted mood at the time and in spite of the bleeding of his wounds He went forward to embrace 
these two men saying: "Bravo Bravo! Well done, but take the name of God." As He embraced them 
and forgave their misdeeds with intense divine love, a peculiar change took place in the mentality of 
Jagai and Madhai. The forgiveness and divine love had an immediate effect.  
It is difficult for weaklings to practice forgiveness. Swami Vivekananda pointed out that any 
weakling can lose his temper; no strength is needed for that. It requires strength to control one's 
self. It requires tremendous power to control one's emotions or natural propensities, what they call 
"normal self-expression." Natural or "normal" self-expression means that when one man criticizes 
another, the second flares up. The moment someone slaps a person, the victim naturally tries to slap 
in return. You do not have to go to human beings to see such a reaction. Dogs and cats fight like 
that. The moment they are alarmed, they jump. When a rat is frightened, he leaps at the person who 
frightened him. Human beings should express nobler qualities. Maturity in emotional life means 
self-control and consequent removal of conflict. In fact, to our way of thinking, a mature person is 
he who can use his ideal in his interpersonal relationships, however provocative the circumstances 
may be.  
When we have seen what has been happening in this world, even from a pragmatic point of view, 
we should learn that a slap for a slap does not solve the problems of life or of the world. What we 
recognize as maturity of the emotional structure in the individual is also true in collective life. The 
group follows a pattern of emotional reaction expressed by its leaders. As it is stated in the 
Bhagavad-Gita:– 
 "Whatsoever the superior person does, that is followed by others. What he demonstrates by 
action, that, people follow”.61  
If a strong individual or a number of individuals are immature in their emotional life their followers 
will express destructive emotional qualities. On the other hand, if the leaders integrate their 
emotions and express spiritual qualities their followers will be affected accordingly. The group 
expresses emotions and forms of behavior pattern according to the ideal it chooses and the ideal that 
is the motivating power of the leaders. What we have discussed here regarding individual emotional 
maturity is also applicable to the group.  
According to Professor Howard Mumford Jones, Professor Pitirim Sorokin estimates that about 
twenty-four million war casualties have taken place during the last fifty years. In his Education and 
World Tragedy, Professor Jones goes on to say:– 
 From the eleventh to the twentieth centuries war casualties totaled about 18 million. In the first 
three decades of the present century we have therefore killed 33 1/3  per cent more human beings 
than were Killed in the previous 800 years. But these figures do not include five other continents, 
and they take us only to the rise of Hitler. There were, it is thought, ten million dead in World 
War I. Influenza, typhus, starvation, and other destroying agencies killed some ten million more. 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
61	  Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita III:21. 	  

	  
43	  
But these figures are principally for Europe; the best guess for the whole world is that 40 million 
died, directly or indirectly in World War I.62  
We have seen in individual personal relationships that aggressive expressions in the form of 
selfishness have not solved anything. On the contrary, the problems have been intensified to the 
point of making people miserable. Even from the pragmatic point of view alone it is wrong.  
Many persons have their doubts about the religious ideal of forgiveness. They feel that others will 
take advantage of them if they practice this ideal. Right now in Europe, Russia is taking its 
advantages. If the United Nations yields, the Americans will say that Russia is taking more than she 
deserves and she is trying our patience, so we should be firm. We are told by some that Russia 
should have been finished off long ago and, at least, she should be conquered now. Suppose that we 
take it for granted that she should have been finished off. Does anyone suppose that this would have 
solved the problem? To be sure, Russia might have been destroyed. But Germany was destroyed 
and the problem still remains. Suppose that this country alone remained a powerful nation; or 
suppose that Russia should become powerful and destroy the Anglo-American alliance. What 
would happen? We can see clearly that internal troubles would arise in such a way that victory 
would destroy the victors. The question may well be asked: How do you know? History gives the 
evidence and the answer.  
In India, about 1500 B.C., there was just such a situation. One group (Pandavas and Yadavas) 
destroyed another group (Kauravas) and established supremacy all over India. In time, these victors 
were destroyed by their own internal quarrels. There is a saying: give a man enough rope and he 
will hang himself. Give rope enough to the Anglo-American alliance or to Russian communism and 
they will destroy themselves. It has happened before and it will happen again. Hitler became 
powerful and tried to conquer the world. Instead, his country was destroyed and he has disappeared 
from the world. In Greek and Roman eras dictatorships arose and vanished. There is an inherent 
defect in the thing itself which ultimately destroys it.  
Historical evidence also proves that nobility, forgiveness, or soul force ultimately wins. Take, for 
instance, the Indian situation. Few people in Europe and America understand what India went 
through for two centuries, ethically, spiritually, economically, politically. In every way Indians 
were demoralized. Slavery has serious consequences. Does anyone think that a foreign government 
could keep India under such subjugation if the people there had not helped and become tools in the 
hands of foreigners? Certainly not. One young man who came here from India was telling us 
recently that during the last war father could not trust son and brother could not trust brother. They 
did not know who was in the employ of the British, who spent an enormous amount of money for 
bribery. For the sake of this money, one testified against another in court and gave all sorts of 
information. An American lady who has just returned from Germany said that Germany is being 
demoralized in the same way. It was already thus demoralized under Hitler.  
About 1897 or 1898, a number of Indian thinkers went to Swami Vivekananda, the father of Indian 
nationalism, to ask him: "Swamiji, how can we remove this slavery?" He told them that India would 
be free in spite of the slavery and its various demoralizing effects on the ruler and the ruled. He said 
that independence would come with no fighting against the British. Conspiracy of circumstances 
has made India independent. An example has been given to the world that collective problems can 
be solved by the method of forgiveness. Mahatma Gandhi's national movement and the work of his 
colleagues indicate definitely that the larger problems of society can be handled by the non-
aggressive, non-violent method. The power of soul force and non-cooperation with the aggressor 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
62	  Howard Mumford Jones, Education and World Tragedy (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1946), p. 7.  
	  

	  
44	  
and enemy can ultimately solve these problems with the spirit of forgiveness. The same is true of 
individual problems.  
The only way that we can solve the problem of aggression once and for all is through forgiveness. 
Again, it was said by Buddha:– 
 "If one man conquer in battle a thousand times thousand men, and if another conquer himself, he 
is the greatest of conquerors."63  
As we have already said, this requires strength; it also requires spiritual development. People must 
spiritualize themselves in order to cultivate this spirit of forgiveness. What does "spiritualize" 
mean? It means conquest of the lower nature and manifestation of the higher nature. It does not 
matter whether people are Jews, Christians, Hindus, Mohammedans, Buddhists, or any other 
religionist. Nor does it make any difference what nationality they may be. The solution is the same 
for all. One cannot reach that state of spiritual consciousness overnight where one is ready to 
forgive his enemies and destroyers. It requires time.  
Recently, some Hindus in New York asked us: "What should we do now (in India)? Should we not 
take up the method that some are using and beat up the Mohammedans who are doing such 
barbarous things?" We told them, no, they would not solve the problem by that method. 
Temporarily the Mohammedans might be subdued or even destroyed. But any violent acts would 
vitiate the nature of the doers; it would bring out the worst in them. They do not know where they 
would end afterwards. Hitler is an example of what happens to the aggressor. He first began to hate 
the people who opposed him, then the Jews, next the individual countries, and finally the world. No 
one knows where it will stop. At first someone may hate one individual, then two individuals, and 
so on. Gradually, this is intensified; it consumes the person. It is vicious. Suppose the Hindus adopt 
the method of destruction used by the Western world, what will be the result? India will be just one 
more European nation, and that would mean the destruction of Indian society. Swami Vivekananda 
repeatedly warned India not to follow the Western method or she would lose her ideal. Now is the 
time to intensify our spiritual life.  
Now is the time to manifest love and sympathy even for the persons who are destructive. We admit 
that they are wrong, but the only way to conquer the evil doer is by dynamic spiritual force. In the 
manifestation of soul force a person does not use the aggressive, destructive method in handling 
personal and social problems. He expresses sympathy, love, and forgiveness to those who are 
aggressive and destructive. In the long run he will find that he will conquer them with his love. In 
our own experience, we have found that the wrongdoer is completely overcome by patience, 
endurance, and forgiveness.   
If, in performing a little kindness, we expect something in return the next moment, we shall be 
disappointed. Even if a man is noble, he has to give the other person time to change his thought 
patterns, habits, and tendencies. When he has had sufficient time to understand the effect of noble 
qualities, he cannot help changing. After all, human beings are potentially divine; however hateful 
they may appear to be now, sometime or other the divinity will manifest itself. It may be under 
cover for the time being, but if a person is patient, he will find that the nobility of others will shine 
forth. When anyone sincerely and honestly expresses spiritual qualities, even the lower animals will 
be influenced.  
Swami Vivekananda tells a story about a holy man in India. This man, Pavhari Baba, actually 
transformed a thief by love and forgiveness. The thief went to his cave and made a bundle of the 
few cooking utensils in which the holy man prepared food for the poor. Just as the thief was leaving 
the cave, Pavhari Baba  returned. The man dropped the bundle and began to run away. Pavhari 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
63	  Dhammapada, trans. Max Muller, VIII: 103	  

	  
45	  
Baba took the bundle on his shoulder and ran after him. "Here," he called, "take this bundle; it 
belongs to you! Your need must be greater than mine, otherwise .you would not have come." He 
caught up with the thief who burst into tears and begged: "Forgive me, forgive me, save me!" This 
incident marked the beginning of a change in the thief. He gave up his bad habits, renounced the 
world, and became a saintly man. It is true that the practice of forgiveness is not easy under vexing 
circumstances nor when it is unsought. Nevertheless, a spiritual man must cultivate it.  
A question may arise as to how a group can express forgiveness and not become aggressive under 
provocative circumstances, such as those we have discussed. The necessary conclusion to be drawn 
from our previous statements is that just as an individual practices non-violence and manifests 
"soul-force," so a group should also cultivate that spirit in order to reach the highest goal of life, 
individually and collectively. Historical evidences suggest that those who take up the aggressive, 
destructive method are invariably destroyed by those methods. The only technique for the group is 
to develop dynamic spiritual individuals who can follow the higher spiritual ideal of forgiveness 
and love in their interpersonal relationships. Their influence will permeate the behavior of the 
whole group, which will then express the same ideal of the conquest of evil by love.  
The conquest of aggression and cultivation of forgiveness in interpersonal relationships not only 
often changes the other person but also creates a peaceful state of mind. Conflicting and agitating 
tendencies which generally create ultimate frustration and dissatisfaction are also removed. If 
anyone wants to do even a little good to the world, he must be thoroughly established in higher 
spiritual qualities through the conquest of natural tendencies and manifestation of the divine 
qualities of patience, love, and forgiveness.  
 

	  
46	  
CHAPTER 6 
Competition or Cooperation 
OCIETY cannot function unless man knows how to behave himself in the company of others. 
He associates with his fellow beings for biological or psychological reasons, being impelled 
by the urge of sex and reproduction and preservation of the species, or the desire for love and 
affection. In his associations, should he cultivate the spirit of competition or the spirit of 
cooperation? There are conflicting theories among rationalistic thinkers. Some think that the spirit 
of competition based on selfishness is the basis of progress. Others feel that unless a person has this 
spirit, he cannot function in personal or in social life. Many people seem to think that modern 
industrial civilization would not have developed but for the spirit of competition. Of course, it is 
true that the present industrial civilization of the West is based on the selfish profit motive and it 
has built up an unique technological structure. But is this system healthy for the highest human 
progress, collective growth, and individual happiness? Evidences in the contemporary world reveal 
that in spite of industrial and technological progress the world is facing tremendous problems. In 
this competitive society, man is tense with anxiety and apprehension; he invariably faces frustration 
and dissatisfaction. Statistical reports show that these psychological evils are frightening socially 
minded leaders. Professor Pitirim A. Sorokin, in The Crisis of Our Age and The Reconstruction of 
Humanity, describes the disorganization of sensate society  
………. the present crisis of our culture and society consists exactly in the disintegration of the 
dominant sensate system of modern Euro-American culture. Having been dominant for several 
centuries, the sensate form has impressed itself on all the main compartments of Western culture 
and society and made them also predominantly sensate. As the sensate form disintegrates, so all 
these compartments of our society and culture likewise disintegrate. For this reason the crisis is 
not a maladjustment of this or that single compartment, but rather the disintegration of the 
overwhelmingly greater part of these sectors, integrated in and around the sensate form…….. it is 
marked by an extraordinary explosion of wars, revolutions, anarchy, and bloodshed; by social, 
moral, economic, political, and intellectual chaos; by a resurgence of revolting cruelty and 
animalism, and a temporary destruction of the great and small values of mankind; by misery and 
suffering on the part of millions a convulsion far in excess of the chaos and disorganization of the 
ordinary crisis.64  
Professor Sorokin also gives constructive ideas for the reorganization of society. He says:– 
 Our remedy demands a complete change of the contemporary mentality, a fundamental 
transformation of our system of values, and the profoundest modification of our conduct toward 
other men, cultural values, and the world at large.65  
Professor Elton Mayo, in The Social Problems of an Industrial Civilization, gives a frightening 
factual evaluation of the industrial civilization of this competitive society:– 
 We have undertaken to transform an economy of scarcity into an economy of abundance, and the 
technicians are showing us the way. We are committed to the development of a high human 
adaptability that has not characterized any known human society in the past, and it is our present 
failure in this respect that finds reflection in the social chaos which is destroying civilized 
society.66  
Later he adds:– 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
64	  Sorokin, The Crisis of Our Age, pp. 21–22	  
65	  Ibid., p. 321	  
66	  Mayo, The Social Problems of an Industrial Civilization, pp. 13-14. 	  
S 

	  
47	  
Technical progress and technical organization have enabled the democracies the "Pluto-
democracies" of Mussolini and Hitler to develop, for the most part, beyond an ignorant and 
peasant type of living, to improve at least to some extent the general material standards of society. 
But we have failed to develop at an equal step the strategy of cooperation; we have allowed 
ourselves the easier path, the strategy of hate, that leads inevitably to the City of Destruction. 
Political leaders, group leaders of all types, have gained followers and momentary support by 
braying out fear and blame and hate to an extent that remains unrecognized in the popular 
literature of our time. ... To blame a person or persons is far easier then to study carefully, and in 
full detail, a situation. Yet it is only the latter study that can avail to lead us out of the chaos of 
misery and malice that has overtaken our once proud civilization.67  
As we have seen in previous chapters, the psychological evils created by the cultivation of the spirit 
of self-assertion and aggression or competition are almost threatening the life of the individual. So 
we are compelled to accept the prophetic interpretation of the people who hold that the spirit of 
competition is destructive and disorganizing. Instead of giving man happiness, competition is 
making him more and more dissatisfied and unhappy, in spite of industrial and technological 
development. So we cannot subscribe to the idea that competition is the basis of progress.  
On the other hand, we find that all the great cultural movements of the world were started by people 
of extreme unselfishness. This true of Buddha, Krishna, or Ramakrishna. The lesser spiritual 
personalities, saints of East and West, who contributed something worth while to the preservation 
of civilization were also unselfish.  
There are many who question this estimate of unselfishness. They think that the teachings of  
Buddha, and other such personalities are obsolete in this world today. They cannot be applied to 
this industrial civilization. This was not only the opinion of Colonel R. G. Ingersoll; it is also the 
opinion of many modern rationalistic, scientific thinkers, although many of them do not have the 
courage of Colonel Ingersoll to speak out; perhaps they wish to avoid antagonizing others. Like 
other rationalists of his century, Colonel Ingersoll set forth ethical ideals when he tried to destroy 
the convictions of the people regarding the existing churches of Christendom. He gave what he 
called the five gospels:– "I respectfully invite your attention. They are Good Living, Cheerfulness, 
Intelligence, Justice and Liberty,"68 We do not agree with these people because the humanistic 
conceptions they propose for the integration and stabilization of our society came directly from the 
above-mentioned great spiritual personalities who were the most unselfish human beings. They 
sacrificed every bit of their energy for the good and happiness of humankind. There is an interesting 
story near the end of one of the greatest epics of India, the Mahabharata. It is given in an allegorical 
sense and should not be taken literally. Yudisthira was proceeding to heaven and on the way he met 
a dog. When they reached the gate of heaven, the dog was not allowed to enter. Yudisthira said: "If 
this dog is not allowed in heaven, then I have no desire to go there." And he refused to enter. At that 
moment, the dog changed his form. It seemed that he was the embodiment of spirituality in the 
form of a dog, testing the integrity and unselfishness of Yudisthira to find out if he was genuinely 
sincere in what he claimed to believe. This man passed the test because he was a spiritual person, 
unselfish and integrated, who actually lived the ideal. In the Bhagavad-Gita, Sri Krishna says that a 
man of wisdom is thoroughly established in the unity of existence and he does not find any 
difference among all beings. To use Sri Krishna's own words: "The knowers of the Self look with 
an equal eye on a Brahmin endowed with learning and humility, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a 
pariah."69  
We are convinced that real civilizations and real progress for mankind have been made by unselfish 
personalities. They showed the world how cooperative society could be established. In fact, their 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
67	  Ibid p.123 
68	  Complete Lectures of Col. R. G. Ingersoll (Chicago: J. Regan & Co.), p. 405 
69	  Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita V: 8. 	  

	  
48	  
example proved that society based on cooperation and coordination could make people happy and 
peaceful. They furnished the raison d’être of cooperation and proved that psychological evils could 
be eliminated by going to the spiritual root of cooperation.  
Most of the leaders of the political and social sciences have, no doubt, been trying to remove the 
evils of society, but they are only making things worse. Instead of removing the problems from 
human personality, they are creating more and more problems to the point that we are now in a state 
where the whole world is threatened by destruction, either by atomic and biological forces or by 
psychological tensions and conflicts.  
The majority of people in post-Renaissance Western civilization adopt the method of competition 
for their personal and public life. It may seem to superficial thinkers that competition and rivalry are 
inherent qualities of man. Ordinary people try to gain their points by removing the obstacles. Yet 
there are a few who fortunately do not believe in that method, who believe in the spirit of 
cooperation and actually practice the ideal in their everyday life.70  
Let us analyze the psychological effect of the spirit of competition, based on the sense of right and 
privilege, on the individual and society. Little children live a physical existence and show the 
competitive spirit most of the time. They seem to feel that unless they grab things they cannot get 
anything out of the world. They become conscious of their rights and fight for them. The result is 
often ruinous. An eye specialist told us about an interesting case. A married couple among his 
patients had a baby when their little boy was three years old. Of course, the mother had to give 
considerable attention to the new baby which made the little boy jealous. When the father came 
home from work he, too, was naturally attentive to the baby. The little boy felt that he had to 
compete with his baby brother. At first he used to cry and do all sorts of things to get attention. 
Then he learned a new trick. He began to look at his mother or father with his eyes crossed. The 
trick was successful in attracting the attention of his parents, so he practiced it to the extent that it 
affected his eye muscles. He was taken to the eye specialist who found nothing defective in the 
visual system, but detected the cause of the trouble and advised the parents to make a great deal of 
the boy and give him some special attention. The parents followed this advice and the boy's habit 
vanished. If parents are not thoughtful when a new child appears in the family, the older child feels 
insecure and inferior in this competitive existence and often develops tendencies which some 
modern psychologists call complexes. If these tendencies are allowed to develop, they show up in 
neurotic behavior when the youngster becomes an adolescent.  
Another young boy was brought up in the family of maternal relatives where there were other 
children. He felt that in order to get anything he had to compete with them. The result was that he 
developed neurotic tendencies when he became an adolescent and these were carried over into his 
maturity. He could not stand the success or praise of any of his colleagues. The early spirit of 
competition became in later days a serious impediment to his social integration. He developed 
severe functional disorders, one of which was ulcers, and his life was thoroughly unhappy. So we 
see that the competitive spirit can affect even our physical well being. When people become adults 
and have to meet society on a larger scale, they do not always realize the extent of their own 
feelings of competition.  
The existence of higher ethical or spiritual ideals creates a conflict in many. Spiritual ideals 
emphasize sacrifice for the good and happiness of others, according to religious scriptures and the 
teachings of the great Spiritual leaders of the world. They say that when a person becomes unselfish 
he not only becomes happy but he brings happiness to others. Naturally, there is a conflict between 
these and lower ideals, or between what Freudians call superego and id. If the conflict is allowed to 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
70	  Ashley Montagu, On Being Human (New York: Henry Schuman, 1950).  
	  

	  
49	  
continue, functional ailments or mental ailments develop, and the whole personality becomes 
disintegrated. Nowadays, we frequently notice young and grown-up people manifesting these 
tendencies which destroy their lives. If the roots of these disturbances in adolescence or maturity 
are examined, they will reveal that conscious or unconscious ideals and emotions were not unified 
or integrated. The tendencies have been allowed to function independently and in a conflicting 
manner; consequently, the personality has never been integrated.  
Scholarship alone will not integrate the personality. Intellectual or aesthetic development does not 
necessarily presuppose unification of the emotions. Karl Barth, one of the great thinkers of Europe, 
wrote a small book during the last war called This Christian Cause.71 In this book he advocated the 
destruction of Germany. He considered the conflict as "our war," "the Christian war"; in other 
words, it was a Christian crusade against evil forces. The present trend of events is proving to us 
that it was not so "Christian" as he wanted his readers to believe. The venom in the book seems to 
us to be contradictory to the teachings of Jesus whom he is supposed to admire and worship.  
Intellectually he is a great admirer of Jesus but his destructive expressions are in distinct opposition 
to the words of that great Teacher. This in itself shows that intellectual conceptions do not always 
lead to integration of the emotions or the personality.  
Let us consider the case of a religious leader who was greatly influenced by the spirit of 
competition in the field of his religious ministry. He was so much affected by this that he wanted to 
make a big show of his activities in competition with his colleagues and other persons in religious 
work. The spirit of ambition and rivalry so disturbed his peace of mind that he broke down and had 
to be hospitalized. We know a few cases of this type. Basically, religious work is not in harmony 
with the spirit of competition. It is really based on the motive of service and the spirit of 
cooperation. However, in*spite of intellectual development, a person can remain emotionally 
disintegrated if his total personality is not changed by spiritual culture. There is a constant conflict 
in everyone, and it is removed only when the ideal is actualized in life. If the ideal remains separate 
and apart, there is no possibility of integrating it with the emotions or of removing mental tension, 
as we shall discuss in Chapter VII.  
Everyone with whom a person has a contact relatives, friends, acquaintances, business associates, 
and so forth has his own tendencies. Each one has certain requirements of emotional life and is 
trying to express his emotions in the name of self-expression. Consequently, there is a very serious 
possibility of conflict. If two people are competing with each other, one of them is bound to be 
disappointed. Perhaps one got a position which the other wanted. Even so, he is not satisfied. He 
will still be anxious lest somebody threaten his new position. Such a spirit creates envy and 
jealousy, even in friendships. Husbands and wives are not satisfied with the attention they get from 
each other; they are afraid that someone else will take away that attention. This apprehension will 
remain in the minds of individuals as long as they want everything without thinking of giving 
something in return. People want social position and friends and admirers; but in order to have all 
of these, they will have to give something, or else there will be no friends and admirers and their 
purpose will be defeated. When there is competition for an objective the greatest amount of 
pleasure or self-satisfaction  there is not only frustration in the mind of one person but there is 
apprehension in all quarters. That is the reason Sri Ramakrishna says: "Oh my, what a storm there is 
in the mind!" And the storm will be there while the struggle for selfish pleasure remains.  
The same spirit of competition is carried by individuals into modern industrial activity. Dr. Franz 
Alexander writes that our industrial system stimulates a desire for more and more production with 
more and more success.72 There is a conflict between American and Russian methods of production. 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
71	  Karl Barth, This Christian Cause (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1941). 	  
72	  Franz Alexander, Conflicts of Power in Modern Culture (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1947), p. 876. 	  

	  
50	  
In this country there is the system of individual or private enterprise which functions under what is 
called the democratic method. There are disturbances between labor and management. Management 
cannot dictate to labor, which has organized unions for its protection and also for more and more 
comforts of life. Management must give higher wages, shorter working hours, and other privileges, 
otherwise there will be trouble. On the other hand, everything in Russia is regimented. The 
government dictates the terms and if they are not followed you either go to Siberia or you lose your 
head. There will be competition on an international level. If it is not with Russia, it will be with 
some other country Germany, England, China, Japan, or even India. 
 When we think of the great problems of the world, we find that selfish, egocentric competition is 
leading us to destruction. As we mentioned in the previous chapter, the last two world wars were 
fought because of conflicts of interests, because of political and economic competition of various 
types. Two groups are lined up against each other. One group thinks that it understands what is 
good for the world; the other group has the same idea. Behind that is the desire for supremacy. 
Otherwise, nobility would have been shown in giving freedom to everyone, according to promises 
made by the leaders at the time that war was declared. But there is no spirit of sharing today, no 
spirit of those "four freedoms." So we are compelled to believe that there is a suspicious element in 
all the groups to a greater or lesser degree. If this spirit of competition is allowed to develop further, 
there will be an inevitable clash just as soon as they are sufficiently powerful or confident of 
victory. We all know that the result will be destruction of the whole of civilization. No one country 
will be saved, whether Eastern or Western, as all are inevitably connected and implicated. So we 
can see that the spirit of competition does not solve individual problems, as we found in the 
psychological study of human behavior, complexes, and functional ailments; nor does it offer a 
solution for social, national, or international problems as we see in the world at large.  
There is another method, and that is the spirit of cooperation. People will say that such an idea is 
Utopian; it may be noble but it is not practical just now. How long can an individual or the masses 
practice cooperation? Our answer is that it can be practiced, provided we see the living example. It 
has been practiced before and it will be in the future. When the people become tired of the spirit of 
ruthless competition, when they learn the lessons from their bitter sufferings, they will seek 
something constructive and an harmonious method of living. We find in individual cases that 
people become weary of the worldly selfishness and seek religious ideals. In The Individual and His 
Religion, Professor Gordon W. Allport gives an interesting idea of what he calls "mature religion." 
In this a man seeks religion with higher understanding and higher values.73 When we become 
mature, whether because of world-weariness, intelligence, or higher aspirations, we can practice the 
spirit of cooperation and service.  
Let us go back to the individual life. If a person does not have harmonious tendencies, he will 
always be disturbed. This harmony can be established when the divergent tendencies are harnessed 
and controlled and when the person has a strong, high ideal in life. Take, for instance, the 
symphony orchestra. If the conductor is withdrawn the different players will lose the rhythm. They 
are likely to play the notes according to their own interpretation, and if this happens the whole 
symphony is ruined. On the other hand, when the conductor is present, the different members of the 
orchestra get their directions and inspiration from him and harmony is established, even though 
they have a different background and tradition. Under the leadership of the conductor they 
coordinate and cooperate with one another. Similarly, physical, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual 
urges can be harmonized when the supreme goal is the ideal of life. By supreme goal we mean the 
awareness of God or the higher Self in us. When a person has that as the goal and tries to use all his 
resources for its fulfillment, there is complete harmony.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
73	  Allport, The Individual and His Religion, pp. 52-74. 	  

	  
51	  
Sri Ramakrishna used to sing a beautiful song describing the waves of the mind. The song likens 
the mind to a lake in which there are innumerable waves, the many tendencies and urges. On the 
lake is a boat with six oarsmen, the senses, who are trying to go in different directions. If there is no 
guiding spirit, the boat will not reach its destination. When we observe the Harvard and Boston 
University boys practicing rowing on the Charles River, we notice that they are guided by a 
unifying force, a coxswain. If they did not have a coxswain to guide them they would not succeed 
even in their competition with other shells. Similarly, every person needs a guiding force in his life. 
Then if he regulates his activities under that ideal he can unify his own tendencies.  
When he emerges from his intimate family circle to the family of the world, he must cultivate the 
idea that the interest of the different members of society is identical. They are veritable 
manifestations of that divine Being or God. They are all seeking the same happiness or peace. If a 
person realizes the fact that the happiness of relatives, friends, acquaintances, or business associates 
depends entirely on cooperation with one another, then alone can individual likes and dislikes be 
submerged. In this competitive world everyone is tempted to struggle for himself and the result is 
bound to be destructive and disastrous. If he thinks he has the right to self-expression and can make 
demands so that others will submit, even noble persons will get tired of such selfishness. Because of 
their nobility they may not say anything but they will be disgusted. So if anyone wants happiness 
and success in the highest sense, he must first learn how to cooperate with different members of his 
family. Then he must carry this into the greater world, society.  
In the United States many people think democracy is the noblest ideal for political or economic 
organization. This democracy depends on the spirit of cooperation, yet there are many who feel that 
the spirit of competition should be advocated for the development of private enterprise. 
Competition might have been to some extent successful and useful in the earlier days of growth in 
this country. But now people are living such a complex life that this very spirit will be destructive if 
it is allowed to go too far. Fortunately, social forces are working to control the selfish attitude of 
one group or another. If this country wants to keep up its democratic system of political and 
economic organization the people must learn how to cooperate with one another. Industrial strikes 
cannot be solved unless both management and labor realize that strikes will not finally solve the 
problems. Only understanding of higher values will give the solution. History shows us that even 
persons who are leading members of labor organizations can become selfish and self-sufficient. 
They can also become dictators. It has happened in the past and can happen at any time. When 
power is concentrated in one individual it demoralizes him.  
Internationally, nations must learn to cooperate with each other. No nation is strong enough or great 
enough or noble enough to dictate to another nation. In this universe of diversity there will always 
remain variety. Why do people want uniformity? They cannot have it. Many times imperialists have 
tried to establish political and economic uniformity with a selfish motive and failed. The different 
members of all the nations must realize that if they are to survive they must learn to cooperate and 
not to compete. This is possible if they realize that their interests are identical. The interest of 
communistic Russia and democratic America is the same — happiness of the people, peace of the 
world. Ultimately, we shall find that every one of these people of any country or any vocation wants 
peace and happiness.  
People often argue that the different members of society should protect their own rights and at the 
same time consider the rights of others. The top ranking and well-meaning leaders are fully 
conscious of this point of view and they feel that it is essential for stabilizing society. However, Sri 
Krishna stresses individual duty rather than rights. "Devoted each to his own duty," He says, "man 
attains the highest perfection."74 Swami Vivekananda in his "Practical Vedanta" and "Karma 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
74	  Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita 18:45.  

	  
52	  
Yoga"75 also emphasizes the spirit of duty. When individuals cultivate this spirit they try to do 
things for others as their duty and they find the true basis for cooperation. This sense of duty should 
be intensified by emphasis on worship. Knowing that the different individuals are the various 
manifestations or children of God, we should try to see the divine spark in the members of the 
family and society. The real basis for the sense of duty comes from this philosophy of life, and the 
understanding of the divinity of man. Consequently, people do things for one another in the spirit of 
service and worship rather than thinking of individual rights. The performance of action in the spirit 
of duty and service naturally enables the doer to protect the rights of others. This high motive 
strikes at the root of selfish competition.  
It is painful to note that in modern social service work in America, the leading personalities of that 
branch of activity sometimes do not seem to realize that the spirit of duty and service should be 
emphasized not only in the relationship with the clients but also with the co-workers. It is amazing 
how they talk of individual rights and act as if they feel the clients are more objects of charity. It 
would be worth while for them to understand that it was the religious ideal that really introduced 
social work to the Western countries through the teachings of Jesus. 
On the other hand, many social workers seem to treat their clients merely as "cases," remaining 
aloof from them. It is equally painful to note that persons receiving help are made to feel that they 
are inferior beings. Those who render assistance through the different organizations are likely to 
demoralize themselves by giving themselves credit for conducting charitable work for the clients. It 
would be worth their while to realize that this spirit intensifies egocentricity on the part of the social 
workers instead of making them humble integrated personalities. We deeply appreciate their service 
to society, but they do not seem to grow in their personal attitude toward life. On the contrary, they 
seem to be losing the spirit of service which will integrate their total personality. However, if they 
would carry out the Judaeo-Christian tradition, in fact the religious tradition, this very act of so-
called charity would in itself make them more and more unselfish; it would help them not only in 
their work but also in their other activities and associations.  
It is noticeable that the relationship between social workers and clients, leaders and subordinate 
colleagues, is considerably influenced by the competitive spirit. This is also true among the social 
agencies themselves, especially in competition for funds. It is to be expected that such tendencies 
will be manifested even in these organizations, when the main viewpoint of life in society is 
egocentric and competitive. Unless the whole structure and outlook of society is changed, the 
disintegration of personality will persist. That is the reason that the spirit of duty is emphasized 
here.  
The spirit of devotion to duty — emphasized by Sri Krishna and Swami Vivekananda in the Indian 
tradition, and by Jesus, St. Francis, and others in the Christian tradition —  should be inculcated 
into the group of social workers. This spirit, especially when manifested by social welfare and 
church workers, will be a living example for the community and will play a great part in 
establishing and stabilizing a really cooperative society in family, national, and international life.  
The mistake that the ordinary man makes, no matter how important his position may be, is not to 
realize that his competitive method is robbing the people of what he really proposes to offer peace 
and happiness. Unless he changes his outlook and philosophy of life, he cannot give peace and 
happiness. He must change from consciousness of right to consciousness of duty. As long as he 
inspires people with the spirit of competition and right, he will gradually destroy those whom he 
loves. Do we not know what has happened to the unfortunate people of Europe? The leaders who 
emphasized the abnormal idea of supremacy also meant well for their people, yet the wrong 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
75	  Works, 1 and II.  
	  

	  
53	  
philosophy destroyed them. We feel that if the leading personalities will change their outlook on 
life and apply the higher philosophy, principle, or ideal in their own individual lives, they can, by 
the spirit of cooperation based on the sense of duty, save the world from destruction and 
degradation.  
 

	  
54	  
CHAPTER 8 
How to Overcome Conflict and Tension 
MERICA is the last word in Western civilization. Yet, in this country there is serious 
mental tension; and with modern competition it is increasing. In a recent conversation with 
some Western scholars who were raised and educated in continental Europe and the British 
Isles, we learned that mental tension among the people of Europe, even since World War II, is 
much less than that which they observed in the United States. In spite of the problems and 
privations in Europe, according to them, the people there seem to stand up under their difficulties 
much better than most Americans. In this connection, it is worth while to note what Dr. Lothar B. 
Kalinowsky has to say in his paper, "Problem of War Neurosis in the Light of Experiments Made in 
America and Other Countries," which was delivered at the annual meeting of the American 
Psychiatric Association in May, 1950  
Naturally, people are anxious about the problem of mental tension. Scholars in general, 
psychologists, and psychotherapists are disturbed over the situation. In fact, the theme of the 1948 
Conference on Science, Philosophy, and Religion, dealt with this problem and its solution through 
the help of scholarship. Psychologists and psychiatrists in other recent conventions and conferences 
have been trying to determine the cause of tension and conflict and the remedy for it.  
We first, find tension in the individual. The individual mind is full of conflict, tension, and 
confusion and consequent struggle. Then again, tension is observed in our inter-personal and inter-
social relationships. It extends throughout society where it exists between two minds or among 
many minds. Naturally, if we want to remove it we want to understand what creates it. Unless we 
have a clear understanding of the cause of tension we cannot remove it. According to Hindu 
psychologists, like Patanjali, there are five states of mind:  
(1) kshipta (extreme restless state when the mind has tension and many emotional conflicts and 
longings);  
(2) muda (inert stage in which the mind has lower conscious and unconscious passions, such as 
anger, lust, and so forth);  
(3) vikshipta (state in which the mind is partly concentrated at times);  
(4) ekagra (concentrated state);  
(5) niruddha (superconscious state).  
Swami Vivekananda explains them:– 
 The Chitta [mind] manifests itself in the following forms scattering, darkening, gathering, one-
pointed and concentrated. The scattering form is activity. Its tendency is to manifest in the form 
of pleasure or of pain. The "darkening" form is dullness which tends to injury. . . . The 
"gathering" form is when it struggles to centre itself. The "one pointed" form is when it tries to 
concentrate and the "concentrated" form is what brings us to Samadhi.76  
These states of mind are made up of various emotions conscious and unconscious. The mind 
naturally has different tendencies. These may be called sentiments, urges, instincts, or emotions. 
Apart from the primitive urges, man also has reactions to the conditions of life and his environment. 
The restless and partly controlled mental states exist, according to Patanjali, because of the 
wavering and indecisiveness of the mind in relation to the different emotions and conflicting urges. 
Generally speaking, tension is created by the presence of various urges and the conflicts among 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
76	   Works, I.203	  
A 

	  
55	  
them. Tension is also created by the presence in man of higher attitudes or religious ideals together 
with the primary urges.  
But there are various theories in the West about the cause of mental tension. The most important 
theories have been offered by the virtual pioneer of psychotherapy in the West, Sigmund Freud. His 
predecessors, Charcot and Janet, worked seriously on the problem, but they did not develop as clear 
a philosophy as Freud as to the cause of tension. A number of his followers also offered various 
theories, particularly Adler and Jung.  
According to Freud, it is a biological urge which creates a conflict in the mind. Although he 
formerly called it the sex urge, he later on changed it to the pleasure principle. This, he said, is the 
urge in man to get the greatest amount of pleasure in life. Then, as he was analyzing his cases 
further, he developed another theory that tension is caused by the conflict of the pleasure principle 
and death principle.77 The mind naturally seeks the greatest amount of pleasure, and if this urge 
does not have expression and is not satisfied due to repression there is serious tension. In his 
writings he discusses the stages of life from childhood to old age, but he classifies all of them as the 
various phases of the sex or pleasure urge. Some of his followers have reached the same conclusion, 
although they use slightly different terminology.78  
Orthodox Freudians say that there is another element in man, the superego, which creates a 
censorship in the mind and prevents the expression of his pleasure urge. Nevertheless, although the 
urge is repressed it remains in the id, the depth of the unconscious. As Freud understands the 
superego, (which is known to some of us as the conscience) it is created by various factors in 
human society, the most dominant one being religion. This becomes the censorship which causes 
the mental conflict. Man cannot satisfy his desire for pleasure because he is haunted by that 
intangible something in the background of his personality. His conscience pricks him and then 
conflict is established. Religious and ethical ideals, which are part of the superego, prevent him 
from doing as he wishes, because he is afraid of the disapprobation of the people around him. They 
have certain ideas and ideals and their presence seems to create a disturbance in his mind. So he 
represses his urge for pleasure. McDougall has something interesting to say about this:– 
 Conflict is always a conflict of incompatible motives, that is to say, motives that impel us to 
incompatible goals. In saying this, I use the word "motive" in the widest sense, to cover every 
form of impulsion, from the crudest, simplest impulse springing directly from some instinct and 
driving us on to thought, action, or word, without our becoming clearly conscious of the goal 
towards which we strive, to desires springing from  well-organized, enduring sentiments, and to 
true volitions and resolve, i.e., desires approved and confirmed by self-conscious reflection.79  
We admit that certain types of religion can create serious maladjustment and tension in the mind, as 
Dr. Terhune points out. He says:–  
We believe that religion may be at fault on three scores:–  
First, religious instruction quite properly starts in childhood. Children are taught a simple and 
sometimes too rigid concept of religion. When they grow up it seems to them that religion is 
unrealistic just another Santa Claus legend; therefore, many reject all religious teachings……. 
But we could wish that, as people develop and are able to comprehend deeper truths, religion 
would keep in step with the individual's psychological and social growth…… 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
77	  Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle.  
78	  Menninger, Man Against Himself. See also Love Against Hate.  
79	  McDougall, Outline of Abnormal Psychology, p. 815.  
	  

	  
56	  
 Second, many religious teachings are not compatible with the known facts of human psychology. 
They represent a repressive psychology rather than a directive one; and are for that reason 
rejected by the individual as not being practical or helpful to him.  
Third, we psychiatrists believe that the Church makes a mistake in assuming the authoritarian 
approach, and we realize that concerning this there might be much argument. Suffice it to say the 
history of religion indicates that whenever the Church assumes authority and power.' which men 
are unwilling to give it, then such authority perishes. Indeed, we believe that once again Christ's 
teachings bear this out. He used not punishment, but forgiveness; he stressed the value of 
personality, love and understanding, and service to others.  
I should like to suggest that the churches establish a fact-finding commission, to ascertain what 
people believe in and live by. ... The people need religion, want it, but often the Church gives 
them little help in attaining it merely because people and Church are both ignorant of what is 
really needed.80   
It is not merely Dr. Terhune who comes to this conclusion; many other thinkers revolt against an 
authoritarian concept of religion which is immature. The erroneous understanding of religion can 
create mental disturbances, as we shall see in later chapters. Freudians and other dynamic 
psychologists can find some justification for their criticisms of certain phases and interpretations of 
religion. However, if they would try to understand the proper values and ideals of religion, then 
they would not have real reason to condemn it in toto as a repressive element and a cause of mental 
tension. In this connection, it is worth while to mention the ideas of Dr. Carl G. Jung which he 
expressed in his Modern Man in Search of a Soul.81 Along with Dr. Terhune, he feels that 
psychology and religion should work together.  
Religion does not advocate repression. On the contrary, its precepts teach us how to control our 
animal nature and biological tendencies and transform them into higher qualities. Religion accepts 
man as more than a mere biological being. Some psychiatrists, in emphasizing the basic importance 
of biological urges, seem to reduce human beings to the status of animals. We admit that there are 
common biological tendencies in human beings and in animals; but man has the possibility of 
overcoming his animal nature by rising to the human plane and gradually to the divine plane of 
existence. Instead of creating tension, religion, rightly understood, dissolves it. On the other hand, 
the views of some psychiatrists can only accentuate animal qualities and thereby create more 
tension.  
The mind has a tendency to repress anything that is painful, disagreeable, or unpleasant. The 
repressed tendencies do not leave the mind; according to Freudians they remain in the depth of the 
unconscious to create further conflicts and tension. These repressed tendencies, whether they are the 
sex complex of Freud or other primitive urges, remain sufficiently powerful to disturb the balance 
of the mind, robbing man of his equanimity and peace. The repressed tendencies come to the 
surface of the mind at times and make themselves known. They sometimes remain in the depths of 
the unconscious to create mental disturbances and functional troubles in the form of stomach ulcers, 
palpitation of the heart, or circulatory and glandular diseases.  
Neurotic conditions are often created by these repressed conflicts, which cause mental tension. 
Neurotic behavior of various types can be traced to the repressed urges in the id, the depth of the 
unconscious. Hindu psychologists, such as Patanjali and Swami Vivekananda, say that Samskāras 
(unconscious impressions), gathered in previous experiences and absorbed through the influence of 
others, are also determining factors of human behavior patterns. The unconscious tendencies are 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
80	  William B. Terhune, M.D., Religion and Psychiatry, Publication Number 6 (New Canaan: Silver Hill Foundation for 
the Treatment of the Psychoneuroses, 1948), pp. 15-17.  
81	  Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul, chap. X, "The Spiritual Problem of Modern Man."  
	  

	  
57	  
not, however, necessarily the dark chambers of the human mind. They need not necessarily be the 
repressed conditions of the pleasure principle or sex, or the conflict between the life and death 
wishes. As Patanjali explains them: "The root being there, the fruition comes (in the form of) 
species, life, and experience of pleasure and pain."82 Swami Vivekananda says in his commentary 
on this aphorism:– 
 The roots, the causes, the Samskāras being there, they manifest and form the effects. The cause 
dying down becomes the effect; the effect getting subtler becomes the cause of the next effect. A 
tree bears a seed, which becomes the cause of another tree, and so on. All our works now are the 
effects of past Samskāras; again, these works becoming Samskāras will be the causes of future 
actions, and thus we go on.83  
Hindu psychologists recognize that, although the present condition of mind is created by past 
thoughts and actions, the present changed mode of living and thinking effectively transforms the 
mind. Therefore, Hindu psychologists are by no means fatalistic or deterministic. They are 
dynamic, progressive, and self-determined.  
Mental tension is difficult to overcome, even from the Freudian point of view, unless there is a 
solution for the conflict between the unconscious urge for pleasure and the imposition of restraint 
by the superego, or the religious and ethical ideals of society, although there is also conceived to be 
an ego which integrates and directs the drives in constructive and cooperative ways. In recent years, 
Freud and his followers have discovered that even if all impositions of censorship or the superego 
are removed mental tension still remains. They have concluded that this is due to the conflict 
between the pleasure principle and the death instinct. Man wants the greatest amount of pleasure in 
life and simultaneously in a mysterious way he wants to commit suicide. According to Freud:– 
…… They [the sexual instincts] are the actual life-instincts; the fact that they run counter to the 
trend of the other instincts which lead towards death indicates a contradiction between them and 
the rest, one which the theory of neuroses has recognized as full of significance.84  
He further says:– 
Our speculation then supposes that this Eros is at work from the beginnings of life, manifesting 
itself as the "life-instinct" in contradistinction to the "death-instinct" which developed through the 
animation of the inorganic. It endeavors to solve the riddle of life by the hypothesis of these two 
instincts striving with each other from the beginning.85  
We wonder how many persons there are in the world who are anxious to destroy themselves, unless 
they are pathological. There may be occasions when a person has a destructive attitude because of 
the pressure of misfortune, unhappiness, or frustration. He may want to get out of this existence, but 
the moment he regains his mental balance, that very moment he feels ashamed of himself. He 
realizes that the idea of suicide or destruction is beneath his dignity or against the very principle of 
life. The post-mortem reports of many suicide cases indicate that after these people attempt to 
destroy themselves they often struggle to preserve their lives. This fact suggests that the will to 
suicide cannot be regarded as a powerful inherent biological urge. There are, no doubt, individuals, 
who sometimes experience conflict between the pleasure urge and the death wish, but it is the 
height of folly to say that this is a natural conflict in every man or being. Even a child is frightened 
the moment his security or safety is threatened, and he runs to the mother for protection. This in 
itself shows that the child does not want to commit suicide. In the animal kingdom we find that 
animals are extremely anxious to preserve themselves. Plants break open the ground to raise 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
82	  Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali ch. II: 13	  
83	  "Raja Yoga," Works, I, 245  
84	  Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle  p. 50.  
85	  Ibid p. 79. 	  

	  
58	  
themselves and to exist. As we study plant life, animal life, and human life we are compelled to 
accept the fact that the suicide or death urge is not a normal constituent of life.  
The Adlerian theory of conflict and tension is expressed in the following passage:– 
 I shall consequently speak of a general goal of man. A thoroughgoing study has taught us that we 
can best understand the manifold and diverse movements of the psyche as soon as our most 
general presupposition, that the psyche has as its objective the goal of superiority, is 
recognized……… Whether a person desires to be an artist, the first in his profession, or a tyrant 
in his home, to hold converse with God or humiliate other people; ... at every part of his way he is 
guided and spurred on by his longing for superiority, the thought of his godlikeness, the belief in 
his special magical power.86  
Again he says: “…….. every bodily or mental attitude indicates clearly its origin in a striving for 
power and carries within itself the ideal of a kind of perfection and infallibility."87 Then he adds: 
"Every neurosis can be understood as an attempt to free oneself from a feeling of inferiority in order 
to gain a feeling of superiority."88  
McDougall and a few others in the Western world have recognized the relative importance of the 
various urges. To quote McDougall:  
……….But this opposition of primary biological functions is not the only source of conflict in the 
individual, as the Freudian psychology would have us believe. Each of the instinctive tendencies 
of human nature seems to struggle for its own maximal development, and to be capable, under 
favoring circumstances, of becoming hypertrophied until it dominates the whole organism, 
becoming the main channel for all its vital energy. And it is only by perpetual rivalry and 
reciprocal checking that obtains between the several tendencies that each is kept in due 
subordination to the whole system. When any one tendency, whether because it is natively of too 
great strength or because it is too much stimulated and favored by the circumstances of the 
individual, becomes so strong that it is not easily kept within due bounds, the process of 
reciprocal checking is exaggerated in intensity and becomes what we call inner conflict.89  
Professor William Brown also takes a broad viewpoint of mental tendencies:– 
 From moment to moment the mind is active and you can classify the activities under the 
headings of self-assertion, self-preservation, sex, curiosity, gregariousness, acquisitiveness, etc. 
Then you may ask: "How through reaction with an environment, do these various tendencies to 
activity fall into a system?" The individual in order to survive must react systematically to the 
changes of his external environment, and so there are different systems of tendencies that spring 
up. These are what we call the instincts, and although we must admit that the doctrine of the 
instincts is a form of faculty psychology, such criticism is not a destructive criticism. The doctrine 
is a part of our general system of knowledge, as an hypothesis indispensable at the moment, like 
the physical hypotheses of the atom and its subsidiary parts, the electrons and protons, which we 
infer although we do not directly observe them.90  
These authorities and some of their contemporaries do not give first place either to sex or to self-
expression. There are other equally important urges, such as self-preservation, the urge for 
knowledge, and the urge for companionship. Man wants company; he seeks love and expresses 
love; he is hungry for love. We do not have to go far to find that out. If we analyze our own minds, 
we find that the majority of us feel lonely if we do not have companionship. In his Personality, A 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
86	  Alfred Adler, The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology, trans. P. Radin, PhD. (New York: Harcourt, Brace 
& Co., 1932), p. 7.  
87	  Ibid., p. 8.  
88	  lbid., p. 23	  
89	  McDougall, Outline of Abnormal Psychology, p. 50. 	  
90	  William Brown, Science and Personality, p. 69.  
	  

	  
59	  
Psychological Interpretation, Professor Allport takes a broad point of view, as did McDougall, and 
his view of functional autonomy is a great contribution in the study of dynamics of the human 
mind. Professor Allport writes:– 
 To understand the dynamics of the normal mature personality a new and somewhat radical 
principle of growth must be introduced to supplement the more traditional genetic concepts thus 
far considered. for convenience of discussion this new principle may be christened the 
functional autonomy of motives.91  
He further says: "The dynamic psychology proposed here regards adult motives as infinitely varied, 
and as self-sustaining, contemporary systems, growing out of antecedent systems, but functionally 
independent of them”.92 It is interesting to note that Dr. C. Charles Burlingame of Hartford, 
Connecticut, recently declared that psychiatrists must have a housecleaning regarding the idea of 
sex. Otherwise, they will fail to solve the problem of mental disturbances. He said:– 
 In the meantime, in psychiatry more than in any other specialty, there is a demand for a 
housecleaning and a hardheaded differentiation between hypotheses and scientific facts.  
On this basis, I decry certain present-day trends, not the least of which is the close identification 
between psychiatry and sex. ... I disagree most heartily with those who would interpret sex as the 
whole of life and expand the definition accordingly.  
A part, but only a part, of man is his creative urge, and in turn, only a part of his creative urge is 
his procreative urge. Expanding the definition of sex to a meaning distinctly different from that 
cannot possibly aid the exchange of knowledge between scientific disciplines, nor can it 
contribute to patient enlightenment In this connection, I also take exception to any dogmatic 
statement to the effect that sex, in accordance with its conventional definition, is always the 
strongest of all human emotions.93  
Karen Homey states her views:– 
 According to Freud, the basic conflict is universal and in principle cannot be resolved: all that 
can be done is to arrive at better compromises or at better control. According to my view, the 
basic neurotic conflict does not necessarily have to arise in the first place and is possible of 
resolution if it does arise provided the sufferer is willing to undergo the considerable effort and 
hardship involved. This difference is not a matter of optimism or pessimism but inevitably results 
from the difference in our premises.94  
Again she writes: "My contention is that the conflict born of incompatible attitudes constitutes the 
core of neurosis and therefore deserves to be called basic"95 These words show that Dr. Horney does 
not agree with Freud and Adler and their followers that tension and conflict are created by a 
particular urge. We find that the various urges cannot be wholly separated from one another. The 
emotions and intellect often function simultaneously. Dr. O. Hobart Mowrer also has something 
significant to say:– 
……. we are suggesting the need for a radically changed attitude, generally, toward social 
authority, and indeed toward the validity and vitality of the whole human enterprise. Freud often 
asserted that psychoanalysis had nothing to do with philosophy, that it was science, pure and 
simple. It now appears that Freudian psychoanalysis not only involved philosophy but, in some 
respects, very bad philosophy; and it was the failure to recognize where his science ended and 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
91	  Gordon W. Allport, Personality, A Psychological Interpretation (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1937), p. 191.  
92	  Ibid p. 194. 	  
93	  C. Charles Burlingame, "What the Physician can expect from Psychiatry." (Paper read at the Eighth Scientific 
Assembly of the Medical Society of the District of Columbia, Washington, September 28, 1948).  
94	   Karen Horney, Our Inner Conflicts (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1945), P- 38.  
95	  Ibid., p. 47. 	  

	  
60	  
his philosophy really began that led Freud and his followers to some of their most grievous and 
fundamental errors.96  
It is our view that mental tension is created not merely because of the presence of a specific urge or 
of several urges or because of extreme desire for their satisfaction. Tension is also created by wrong 
understanding of life in general. It is true that frustration of any urges will cause tension. We have 
studied a number of individual situations and have found persons who can be diagnosed by the 
Freudian or Adlerian methods, while others are found to be disturbed because of improper 
functioning of the urge for knowledge, beauty, companionship, love, or self-preservation. If any of 
these urges becomes extremely strong and they lose their proper balance, neurotic and psychotic 
conditions can result.  
A few years ago we knew a woman of about twenty-five years of age who had a strong impulse for 
sex expression. We do not believe that her tendencies were unusual. However, in her earlier life 
certain persons had impressed upon her that her appearance indicated saintly qualities. She was 
impressed so much that instead of having a normal outlet for her expressions she indulged in hidden 
satisfaction. This urge gradually became strong and she began to imagine that every person was 
sexually interested in her. Due to some unfortunate disappointments, her whole energy seemed to be 
directed to the gratification of that tendency. She gradually developed psychotic tendencies and was 
hospitalized. This woman could have been helped if it were not for the outside influence in the early 
part of her life which so impressed her that she did not have normal expression. She could neither 
live a normal life nor could she devote herself to intense spiritual practices, because of the 
erroneous understanding of her interpersonal relationships. We are sure that if this person could 
have had spiritual understanding of life early enough she would not have experienced this 
unfortunate condition; we are convinced that she can be helped even now if steady spiritual training 
can be given to her.  
Another young man, a scholar, had a most unfortunate relationship with his parents because of the 
disturbance between his mother and father which resulted in a divorce and the remarriage of both. 
This young man developed an unusual desire for establishing himself and for being first in every 
effort he made in school, college, and the university. We observed that How to Overcome Conflict 
and Tension 91 his neurotic condition was manifested because of two strong desires, one to become 
great in academic life and the other to become a great intellectual in competition with his colleagues 
and superiors. He may have had the desire to excel both of his parents. As we have been watching 
this individual for some time, we have become convinced that he is changing his outlook on life and 
realizing that an unconquerable desire for intellectual status in competitive society is extremely 
harmful to healthy living. He is systematically practicing different forms of spiritual exercise to 
manifest his will power, so that he can carry out in his regular activities and scholastic career the 
ideal he has now chosen. He has been helped immensely by higher understanding of life. He is 
becoming normal through understanding the cause of his neurotic behavior and he is gradually 
overcoming both neurotic tendencies and functional troubles.  
A young woman of thirty years of age had enjoyed a fairly happy married life until the depression 
of the early thirties. At that time her husband's financial security was threatened. Then her very 
successful father-in-law died. This woman was apprehensive lest her widowed mother-in-law 
should request help from the husband. The mother-in-law appeared in the picture which created 
serious tension in the young wife. She had a nervous breakdown and all the symptoms of serious 
mental disorder. She was stabilized by attaining a higher philosophy of life. She realized that the 
mother-in-law would not be a burden to her, even if worse came to worst. She was also convinced 
that the life of consecration can alone remove her egocentric, selfish attitude. It took several months 
for her to establish herself in this new way of thinking. In the meantime, she systematically went 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
96	  O. Hobart Mowrer, "The Problem of Anxiety Some Conceptual Difficulties." (Mimeographed.) 	  

	  
61	  
through spiritual exercises of concentration, meditation, and so forth, and gradually developed will 
power.  
Time and again we have seen that people who have a strong urge for self-expression develop 
peculiar behavior patterns. They will almost always try to show off. Many persons have observed 
that children beyond two years of age begin to show the tendency towards self-expression. They do 
not like to be limited. The moment a child finds that his father is opposing him, if he is bright he 
will say "Daddy, go away!" The very presence of "Mommy" imposes a limitation. As children 
become older, the 9% Mental Health and Hindu Psychology urge for self-expression becomes 
stronger. We have known many adolescents who rebelled against the ideas and ideals to which their 
parents gave weight. According to Professor Allport's study, the majority of young students either 
give up their church affiliation or institutional religion, or criticize it because it was given to them 
by their parents and others in authority.97 It isn't that they do not like those in ecclesiastical authority 
but that such persons are symbolic of the ideas and ideals, habits and ways, of their parents, against 
which they revolt. Amusingly enough, these same students often return to institutional religion 
when they are thirty or thirty-five years old, or even earlier.98 At a certain stage of life, young 
people revolt against anything that is given to them by anyone. They want to have self-expression, 
and if they go back to the established institutions, it is not because the parents want them to do so 
but because they themselves so desire. They want to feel important; they are individuals and can do 
as they like.  
Parents should try to understand the psychological requirements of their children, even though it is 
difficult for them to overcome their natural apprehension for the welfare of the children. If the 
children feel that they are always thwarted and frustrated by their parents' expressions of "do" and 
"don't," then they rebel against everything that the parents want them to do. We admit that parents 
are not trained psychologically, so they make mistakes and drive their children away from the 
things that they love or adore, because the parents are tactless and do not properly express their 
love. If they were tactful they would not have to go through agony of heart. The children would do 
what the parents wished, if the parents would make the children feel as if they chose everything for 
themselves. However, there is a strong urge for self-expression in human beings. If this urge does 
not get a certain amount of satisfaction it will create abnormalities in the mind.  
Ambition has become one of the important elements of the human mind today. It is one of the great 
emotional urges which create tension. When a person has strong ambition for power, position, or 
intellectual achievement and he finds that somebody else is trying to occupy or already occupies a 
coveted position in his field, he becomes apprehensive. If a professor feels that he has to keep up his 
position in the university and finds that some other persons are competing with him, his ambition 
creates anxiety. Often young scholars become mentally sick and disturbed and develop many 
functional ailments, as well as neurotic and psychotic behavior, because of ambition. Ambition for 
scholarship and for the maintenance of intellectual position becomes a disease with them. Older 
scholars also develop anxiety neuroses because they want to go farther and farther, beat their 
competitors in the university, and write more and more books so that they will be appreciated. In 
other words, Ambition for position, recognition, or appreciation becomes a source of tension.  
We find also that intellectualism can create tension in some instances. Suppose that I have a strong 
urge to be a great scholar, but, unfortunately, I am not adequately endowed with native equipment. I 
may be fit to become a fine mechanic but because I saw that my father or grandfather was a scholar, 
I try to imitate him. I feel that I can and should become a scholar. We have seen such cases where 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
97	  Young people of the free thinking groups, Jewish and Christian, are more likely to revolt against established religious 
institutions than those of the very orthodox groups. 	  
98	  Gordon W. Allport, The Individual and His Religion.  
	  

	  
62	  
people developed great tension. We know of a scholar's son who tried to imitate his father, but he 
felt that he would never attain individual recognition because his father was such a great scholar. 
This caused the son serious anxiety; he even suffered physical disability because he felt he would 
not be recognized in the field of scholarship. The moment he had the courage to give up his 
intellectual pursuits, he changed completely. He may never be an outstanding man but he will have 
a satisfactory and happy life. If he had imitated his father, his mind would have been haunted by the 
thought: "I will not have any recognition in this world. My father has attained far greater heights 
than I can ever reach."  
When a person is overworked, either through a sense of responsibility, ambition, or any other 
motive, he shows considerable tension. This may be due to purely physical reasons, but even here 
psychological factors often enter in. 
The question arises: How are people to remove their tension? If it is not removed they cannot have a 
satisfactory life. Everyone wants satisfaction. We want to be happy, but happiness is 94 Mental 
Health and Hindu Psychology not present in the mind which is not satisfied or relaxed. Psychiatrists 
and psychologists, particularly clinical psychologists, are trying to remove tension. Twenty-five per 
cent of the cases treated are cured by the methods of psychiatrists or clinical psychologists. Forty 
per cent are helped; the rest are not helped at all. The clinical psychologist who reported these facts 
to us told us also that the twenty-five per cent who are cured would perhaps have recovered anyway 
without psychiatric treatment. So from his point of view only about forty per cent of the cases are 
really helped by psychological treatment. It is an unfortunate situation. We are compelled to find 
out if there is any other solution. Dr. Robert W. White says in this connection:– 
... at least 1 person out of 20 may be expected to become a patient in a mental hospital at some 
time during his life. The last is indeed so gloomy that it should not stand without a reminder that 
patients leave mental hospitals as well as enter them. Census figures for 1938 show that slightly 
more than half of the patients admitted were later discharged either fully recovered or at least in 
a considerably improved condition.99  
Freudian, Adlerian, and other such psychologists can, no doubt, ameliorate suffering or mental 
tension; they can help to control tension; we do not deny it. According to the above report by the 
clinical psychologist, forty per cent of the people are helped. However, they remain greatly 
dependent on the analyst. Yet in order to have a satisfactory life and normal behavior, independence 
is necessary. Whether a person goes to a psychiatrist, clinical psychologist, or a religious teacher, he 
must be independent. Independence is one of the strongest urges in the human mind. If it is 
necessary to depend on psychiatrists or psychologists all our lives, then life is not worth living. So 
independence must be achieved.  
At a recent meeting of the American Psychiatric Association in New York, statistics were given 
which showed that fifteen per cent of all university students in this country are suffering from 
mental disturbances. At this meeting it was advised that all institutions, universities, and colleges 
should have trained psychiatrists and clinical psychologists rather than untrained counselors to help 
the students.  
Dr. Dana L. Farnsworth, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, also had something 
interesting to say in the report he made to the Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry regarding 
the use of psychiatry in higher educational institutions.100 As a result of his experience with 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
99	  White, The Abnormal Personality, p. 564. See also D. B. Klein, Mental Hygiene (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 
1944), pp. 98-99. C. Landis and J. D. Page, Modern Society and Mental Disease (New York: Farrar & Rinehart, Inc., P- 
24 	  
100	   Dana L. Farnsworth, "The Role of Psychiatry in Colleges and Universities." (Group for the Advancement of 
Psychiatry.) [Report to be published.]  
	  

	  
63	  
emotional disturbances among students and faculty members, he is of the strong opinion that a 
broader interpretation of modern psychotherapy is necessary to equip the future leaders of society in 
the universities with emotional stability and integration.  
Intellectual comprehension of tension will not remove it. Some of those who are going to 
psychiatrists are aware of their own mental disturbances and the causes. They are convinced that 
their trouble stems from ambition, over-emphasis on self-preservation, or the inordinate desire for 
the greatest amount of pleasure or sex satisfaction. But can they solve the problems of their tension 
or remove it? We know of some persons who have been going to psychiatrists continually for 
twenty years without losing their tension and conflict.  
A good scholar was teaching in a university. During the last war he met a number of people in the 
course of his work who were great personalities in their own professions in different fields. They 
went to the university for special courses and attended his classes. He became frightened because he 
felt that he could not cope with them intellectually. That sense of inferiority created tension in him 
and he sought help in psychoanalysis. It was the interpretation given to him by the psychiatrists that 
ruined this man. He became frightened when he was led to think that he was still clinging to 
childhood or boyhood habits and ways of life. He had to give up his successful teaching. His is an 
instructive case but at the same time discouraging, in the light of what was done to him, for it shows 
how wrong theories can generate conflict and tension.  
His wife brought him to us when he had actually become incapable of doing anything worth while. 
We repeatedly explained to him that a man is potentially divine even though he may seem to be 
weak. He was encouraged to understand that he not only had the capacity to teach students of 
college level but also that he could be happy in his interpersonal relationships. He was helped to see 
that he had no justification to be afraid of anyone as he was inseparably connected with the Divine 
Being. He was also given practices of concentration and meditation to suit his intellectual 
requirements, and he was loyal in carrying them out. Fortunately, he used to visit with us at least 
twice a week and discuss his problems freely. He was free in relating his past emotional life and 
experiences, however disagreeable they might have appeared. In the course of two to three months 
he showed definite signs of improvement. With proper understanding of the ideal of life and certain 
mental training for the development of will power, he gradually re-integrated his personality and 
resumed his teaching work.101  
The psychotherapist who is trying to help these people must, like the Indian guru, be a person of 
integration. If he himself is not emotionally integrated, he may not be fully capable of helping 
anyone who is suffering with tension. Even though he may know the technique, this in itself does 
not alone enable him to know the true source of tension and conflict. He may understand that a 
person has tension without knowing the cause. If someone goes to a Freudian or Adlerian or 
Jungian psychotherapist, all his difficulties will be interpreted by the Freudian, Adlerian, or Jungian 
theory. In his Outline of Abnormal Psychology, McDougall gives clear insight into the various 
interpretations of the same dream given by men like Freud, Jung, and others. It is indeed difficult 
for anyone to understand the inner motives of a person and the cause of dreams by interpretive 
methods unless he has insight into the nature of the mind. This cannot take place unless a therapist 
is an integrated person free from all prejudices and preconceived notions.102 A person may be lonely 
and seeking companionship or he may be ambitious for power or position, but his tension will be 
attributed to the frustration of the urge for pleasure or self-expression if the psychotherapist views 
him through a narrow theory of conflict and tension.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
101	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology. See chap. V, "Will and Personality” for details on mental training.  
102	  McDougall, Outline of Abnormal Psychology, chaps. VII-IX.  
	  

	  
64	  
As previously mentioned, some of the psychotherapists consider religion as the cause of tension. 
Our answer to them is that when religion is properly understood it cannot create tension. On the 
contrary, it dissolves and removes all tension from the mind. It is declared by mystics and 
demonstrated by them that religion strikes at the root of all tension when it is systematically 
practiced in everyday life. Proper emphasis is given to the objectives of life, and relative values are 
subordinated to the supreme objective — the manifestation of divinity already in man, as Swami 
Vivekananda has said. Other religious leaders speak of the same thing in different terminology — 
such as love of God, experience of God, union with God, or understanding the inner light — and 
with different ideological backgrounds. Religion teaches man that the pursuit of pleasure on the 
sense plane is of secondary value. The moment pleasure is made the primary objective of life, 
tension is created. The mind is stimulated by desire for more and more; and the spirit of 
competition, selfishness, egocentricity, and consequent disturbing mental and physical activities 
become evident.  
 
There are some unwise religious teachers who erroneously emphasize the sense of sin and guilt and 
they are likely to create mental disturbances in some people. Dr. Fritz Kunkel makes an appropriate 
comment:– 
 Why has nobody thus far provided a real and practical system of Christian psychology? Probably 
the deepest reason for this is to be found in a general mistake on the part of Christendom itself: 
Namely, in its approach to the problem of sin. Vices, character difficulties, and nervous 
symptoms are said to be related to sin, and sin is only to be shunned, never to be discussed or 
investigated. Sin is bad, and the good man turns away in horror. This emotional attitude is one of 
the gross fallacies of theology, whether it takes itself out in indignation or pity. We psychologists 
know that this attitude betrays the deficiencies of the Christian workers themselves. The 
individual worker has not yet solved his own problems; therefore he cannot solve the problems of 
his clients.103  
On the other hand, some of the writers on the psychology of religion, such as Edwin Diller Starbuck 
and William James, go so far as to conclude that the sense of guilt is a necessary qualification for 
religious conversion.  
Great founders of religion do not always emphasize the need for a sense of guilt and sin for 
religious development. They show us the positive side of religion. As Jesus tells His disciples: 
"Abide in me, and I in you. ... I am the vine, ye are the branches."104 It is true that Jesus mentions 
sin for the benefit of the common people; but at the same time He shows how the sinful state of 
mind can be overcome by repentance and redemption, through spiritual living, as described in the 
Sermon on the Mount. St. Paul expressed this idea when he said: "Be not overcome of evil, but 
overcome evil by good."105 Again, Sri Ramakrishna said to Vijoy, one of His followers:– 
 Will you tell me one thing? Why do you harp so much on sin? By repeating a hundred times, "I 
am a sinner," one verily becomes a sinner. One should have such faith as to be able to say, 
"What? I have taken the name of God; how can I be a sinner?"106  
Swami Vivekananda also said:– 
 Do not talk of the wickedness of the world and all its sins. . . . The world is made weaker and 
weaker every day by such teachings. Men are taught from childhood that they are weak and 
sinners. Teach them that they are all glorious children of immortality, even those who are the 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
103	   Kunkel, In Search of Maturity, pp. 34-35.  
104	  John 15: 4-5.  
105	  Rom. 12: 21.  
106	  The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, trans. Swami Nikhilananda (New York: Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Center, 1942), 
p. 159.  
	  

	  
65	  
weakest in manifestations. Let positive, strong, helpful thoughts enter into their brains from very 
childhood. Lay yourselves open to these thoughts, and not to weakening and paralyzing ones.107  
The words of St. Paul convey the same meaning:– 
 Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are 
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good 
report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.108  
The highest religion neither creates tension nor does it emphasize sinfulness. No doubt it gives a 
sense of inadequacy at times but it also gives in great measure inspiration, hope, and encouragement 
for the attainment of a harmonious life according to the supreme goal of life. The primary emphasis 
is not on sin, but on love of God.  
Now let us consider how tension and conflict can be removed. Freudian psychoanalysis, as we 
mentioned in the previous chapter, is advocated by the vast majority of the psychotherapists in the 
West. Some of them accept the Adlerian method and the Jungian training process. Jung's influence 
is felt, in one way or another, by many of the American psychologists who believe that religion is 
not the cause of conflict and tension. Jung understands that tension is created by the double nature 
of man masculine and feminine, extrovert and introvert but he feels that harmonization and training 
of neurotic persons is essential for the removal of tension. Karen Homey seems to go still further in 
the right direction, from our point of view, when she emphasizes and gives encouragement that man 
is not in a hopeless position with his tension and conflict. Rogers' nondirective counseling and 
consequent insight also seem to be helpful. Some of the American psychiatrists follow Jung's and 
Horney's methods, while most of the religious counselors and social workers follow Rogers' 
method.109  
All of these methods are helpful but we have to go even deeper in order to remove tension and 
conflict. Mere knowledge attended by any of these methods — heterognosis or autognosis — does 
not seem to solve the problem. We must have a sound philosophy of life. Unless we know what is 
our primary objective in life, we cannot remove tension. The true primary objective, as we 
constantly emphasize, is religious culture the knowledge of God, the manifestation of the divinity 
that is implicit in man. We must shift our emphasis from achievement on this sense plane of 
existence to the realization of our true nature, Self or God. This life, this finite existence, cannot 
satisfy the infinite nature of man. Basically the infinite is within us. "Lo, I am with you always."110 
Consequently, there will be dissatisfaction with anything short of that divine presence. The 
wealthiest man is dissatisfied with his wealth. We have seen time and again that people of wealth, 
power, and position are disturbed because their inner nature is not satisfied. This will always be the 
case until and unless they experience something of the Reality or God. 
This brings us to the question: Are religious people satisfied? We suggest that they are satisfied if 
they are really religious. When they have a little taste of that inner life, when they have a little 
glimpse of that Reality behind this phenomenal world, they become satisfied. They shift their 
emphasis from the search for sense gratification to higher spiritual achievement. It is interesting to 
note that even if a person does not have that glimpse of the super sensuous he can still attain a 
considerable degree of satisfaction by going through certain spiritual practices and disciplinary 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
107	  Works, II, 87.  
108	  Phil. 4: 8.  
109	  Alexander, Fundamentals of Psychoanalysis. See also Gregory Zilboorg, A History of Medical Psychology (London: 
George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1941), chap. 11. Jung, Psychology and Religion, and Modern Man in Search of a Soul. 
Horney, Our Inner Conflicts	  
110	  Matt. 28:20.  
	  

	  
66	  
processes. Swami Brahmananda used to tell his disciples again and again that next to the realization 
of God is the joy of spiritual practices.  
... If you can continue this struggle for two or three years, you will find in you a joy unspeakable; 
your mind will be calm and docile. In the beginning meditation proves very difficult and dry. But 
if you 'persist, as in the taking of a medicine, you will find in it a perennial source of joy, pure and 
unalloyed.111  
Pursue the religious ideal for some time intensely and you will find that there is satisfaction in your 
mind. Restlessness and tension will vanish gradually. Intensify your spiritual practices, dosing your 
eyes to success or failure. You will find, as the great Swami tells us, that in two or three years your 
mind will become peaceful. With spiritual experiences there will be unlimited, unalloyed, and pure 
satisfaction and joy. Such spiritual joy does not depend on sense objects; it does not rely upon any 
individual; it is not conditioned by the possession of money, power, or position. These experiences 
change the mind and it becomes illumined. The conflicting urges become balanced and tension is 
automatically dissolved. Inordinate desires for any expression on the biological plane will gradually 
be harmonized with human tendencies. There will be a perfect balance in the mind.  
 
 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
111	  Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda (2nd ed.; Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1933), p. 100. 	  

	  
67	  
CHAPTER 8 
Social Adjustment 
AN is a social being. His social relations are essential to his existence. Some of the 
biologists think that the "social instinct" is cultivated in man because of his inability to 
cope with nature single-handed; therefore, the biological instinct of self-preservation is 
the basis of his social instinct. We cannot help but disagree with the biologists in our study of the 
psychological aspects of human effort and activity. We do not deny that part of the social urge is 
connected with self-preservation, yet it is incorrect to say that this is entirely so. The urge to love is 
present in man. This urge, apart from its sexual implications, seeks an outlet in his various thought 
patterns and activities. Man does not seem to be happy until or unless he can express love and have 
it from others. He cannot satisfy the urge of love without being socially conscious.  
Even animals give evidence of having social instincts beyond the point of self-preservation. When a 
dog is in danger, other dogs begin to bark and show considerable feeling toward him. Through 
observation and experiment it has been found that this is true of birds. Observers of ants and bees 
tell us that these insects show considerable cooperation and coordination beyond the point of 
individual security.  
There are psychological reasons for the social tendencies in man. He wants to express his emotions 
of love and sympathy and he wishes the same from others. Men and women are miserable if they do 
not have the love and sympathy of others. They can bear all sorts of struggles, pain, and agony if 
they are assured of sympathetic consideration and a little expression of love from those around 
them. The mental life of an individual does not develop and does not have satisfaction without the 
opportunity for the expression of love and sympathy.  
During the Victorian age in England and then in America, it was not considered proper for a lady to 
express her emotions. It was even considered wrong to cry when there was a death in the family. 
This kind of restraint is disastrous. Psychologists have traced certain conditions in modern society 
to the lack of emotional outlet. When people do not have any outlet for their emotions their lives 
become empty, even though they may be busy with duties and responsibilities. The moment they 
have certain emotional outlets, they feel a sense of satisfaction; life seems to them worth living. In 
cases of extreme emotional dissatisfaction, people have committed suicide. A medical man reported 
an amazing situation to us. A wealthy man in one of the eastern cities was devoted to his mother, 
even though he was married and had his own friends. When his mother died, he felt so lonesome 
that he attempted to commit suicide. When this was discovered, his wife called in the doctor along 
with some prominent psychiatrists. They stayed with him the whole night, talking with him and 
trying to dissuade him from killing himself. They succeeded in quieting the man. However, he later 
made another attempt, and again they talked with him and seemed to succeed in their persuasion. 
The third time he completed the job. It may seem strange that a married man with friends would 
want to commit suicide; but the emotional attachment to his mother was so strong that her 
disappearance made his life empty. When the object of love is withdrawn, a person feels lost.  
Such things are done by people because of their lack of adjustment due to the abnormal 
concentration of love on one human being. Human beings are thrown together and have to learn 
how to adjust themselves under changing conditions. Those who cannot do this are miserable. 
Adjustment in social life is important for a person's well being and satisfaction in life. Without it, 
success is impossible. A baby has to begin immediately to adapt himself to the new conditions of 
life. When he becomes aware of the existence of others, he begins to notice whether or not they are 
sympathetic. Babies and small children are intuitive in knowing the mental conditions even of 
strangers. The child that cannot adjust himself to changing conditions becomes maladjusted and 
M 

	  
68	  
develops neurotic symptoms. Child psychologists tell us that symptoms of neurosis are sometimes 
observed at the age of five or six and sometimes earlier. Then at the age of maturity a child must go 
through a period of adjustment. He goes out to the school, the playground, and meets new people in 
different surroundings, people who have tendencies opposed to his own, many of whom are selfish. 
Again when he goes from school and college into the greater sphere of life, he has to adjust to a 
wider world. At this time in life there is a great deal of difficulty for those who were maladjusted 
during their childhood or adolescence.  
A few years ago, a young lady came to see us, introduced by one of our students. She said that her 
husband was jealous by nature, so much so that he was not willing for her to have any children lest 
he be deprived of her love. The young woman was craving a child. This created a pathetic conflict 
between them which was unbearable for the woman. She was a nervous wreck. Although the 
husband was a successful business man and earned plenty of money, he had hypertension (high 
blood pressure). His heart was becoming affected. Medical and psychiatric authorities agreed that 
the only thing they could suggest to save his life was for him to undergo neuro-surgery by means of 
a spinal operation. If he had learned to adjust himself emotionally to married life, his life could have 
been readily saved with no operation and he would not have had such serious physical ailments. 
This is not a rare instance.  
Many people are maladjusted when they reach middle age. They do not want to accept the change 
of life and they seem to think that they can have a good time without stopping. By "good time" is 
meant parties until two or three o'clock in the morning and other activities of young people. This 
pursuit of pleasure has been the objective of their lives and they do not want to give it up when they 
are older. They try to keep up the pace but the body and nerves will not permit it with the result that 
they are miserable and wreck themselves worrying over their lost youth.  
People who do not know how to live happily in their maturity  and old age and accept the 
conditions of declining years are miserable. Many of them want to imitate the younger people, as 
Professor Carl Jung says:– 
 For the most part our old people try to compete with the young. In the United States it is almost 
an ideal for the father to be the brother of his sons, and for the mother if possible to be the 
younger sister of her daughter.112  
We have deep sympathy for such persons. When they think that physical vigor is the supreme 
objective of life, we understand why they want to cling to youth. However, this desire brings with it 
maladjustment and abnormal behavior, not to speak of unhappiness and dissatisfaction. We have 
seen elderly and gracious people who were actually radiant at that time of life because they were 
well adjusted. We had a friend eighty-two years of age who was a business man. Often we would 
go to see him just to talk. He was friendly and would treat us like his own son. He lived a quiet life, 
and his face reflected his serene mental condition and satisfaction. On the other hand, his wife was 
far from peace. She wanted to go on and on with her activities. She was restless, unhappy, and 
disturbed, in spite of her economic security and family, including her grandchildren.  
Many persons are intellectually maladjusted. They may be temperamentally of one type but they 
admire temperaments of another type and try to imitate them. The desire to become like another 
person is abnormal and creates dissatisfaction and frustration. We know of a person who is 
intellectually and emotionally maladjusted because he wants to be admired all the time. He wants to 
be praised as the only man of his group who accomplishes anything. This desire for praise and 
admiration is so abnormal that his social relationships are disagreeable. There is no possibility of 
his having any satisfactory social life unless he is assured of getting ahead of others in some way.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
112	  Jung: Modern Man in Search of a Soul, p. 126.  
	  

	  
69	  
Today we face the problem of modern industrialization. We used to think that the Oriental countries 
were free from these problems. But now China and India are industrializing. If they are not careful, 
they will face the same situation as that of Europe and America. As industry expands, men and 
women are taken from their old ways of life and they find themselves in a new environment.  
They break away from the old moorings and familiar conditions. The new conditions create social 
and individual problems. Many modern sociologists and other social scientists have been studying 
this problem seriously in Europe and America.  
Some advanced French thinkers studied the industrial situation toward the end of the last century. 
They said that the industrial civilization at that time was creating an "anemic" condition in society. 
In the human body anemia is serious, whether it is pernicious or secondary. The first is fatal and the 
second is weakening. There is no energy, strength, or vitality. The same thing is true in society. 
Social scientists in Harvard University and the University of Chicago have been studying this 
problem for the last twenty-five years. Elton Mayo's study and research in industrial problems have 
uncovered some amazing facts concerning the prevalence of suicide and juvenile delinquency in 
industrialized areas. No doubt, the last war has a bearing on these problems, but even so an 
appalling number of cases were known to exist prior to the war. The period which preceded the war 
can be considered as the "anemic" period. At that time the people lacked vitality and the power of 
adjustment, nor did they care to adjust. The inclination of families to move here and there is 
regarded by social scientists as dangerous. The family has no roots anywhere. There is no 
psychological stamina in the children. They do not have the capacity to adjust to changing 
conditions.  
Life in the same community creates a sense of social consciousness of other members of the 
neighborhood and a feeling o! responsibility for them at times of hardship and misfortune. The 
different families in a given area learn how to serve and help each other. They expand with loving 
thought and consideration for their neighbors and they have satisfaction in their social relationships 
and behavior. When they do not have such opportunities by being a part of community life, they 
cannot stand the difficulties of life. When families frequently move about, the children lose the 
stabilizing influence of social contacts and gradually become self-centered and selfish. They do not 
learn to adjust themselves in new areas of existence. In turn, their behavior becomes neurotic and 
shows the social evils that are observed by the Harvard and Chicago social scientists.  
A professor of the psychology of education at Harvard has been studying the Indian social system 
with reference to the social conditions in America. In India (as in China), we have what is called a 
joint family system. The sons take their wives into the home to live with the parents, so that parents, 
children, and children's children all live together. Unfortunately, in recent years the system has 
radically changed because of the struggle for existence under adverse economic conditions. 
Families have had to split up when some of the members went away to try and get a living 
elsewhere. However, they still cling to the old system to the extent of getting together at least for a 
month every year during the vacation time. The joint family has a tremendous influence. An 
individual has to adjust himself to his brothers, sisters, sisters-in-law, their children, and the other 
family members. He also learns to love and serve them and he receives love and service in return. 
In families we knew, where the father earned more than any of the other working members, he 
never gave his wife or children more than what the other working men of the household could give 
to his sisters-in-law and their children. Everyone received equally their ordinary living, clothes, 
ornaments, educational opportunities, and so on. When we have described the joint family system 
to some of the progressive social scientists in this country, they have all admired it but have said 
that it would not be workable in this competitive society of the West.  
There are two sides of this system to consider. We do not say that it is all good. There is a danger of 
too much dependence on the members of the family who earn the most money, which can lead to 

	  
70	  
loss of initiative. On the other hand, there is a great contribution made by joint family life; it 
enables the members to become adjusted personalities and to be less selfish and egocentric. Those 
who are maladjusted are not appreciated in society. The members of the family learn self-sacrifice, 
which is a blessing to themselves and others.  
Modern society, industrial society, generally does not consider self-restraint. Although we admire 
the attempts being made by the groups at Harvard and Chicago, they have not touched the root of 
industrial problems nor have they found the solution.  The sense of security in society cannot be 
introduced or established by mere social security measures of insurance, assistance, and other such 
benefits. Real security comes from the sense of adjustment based on higher spiritual values. There 
will be changed conditions in both Eastern and Western society. The East will be thoroughly 
changed when industry is introduced as vigorously as it was introduced in Europe and America. 
Industrial centers will attract people from the villages. Then the people of the East will have to 
know how to adjust themselves. It would be a mistake to say that the industries should be 
decentralized and the people sent back home to the villages. It cannot be done either in the East or 
West. Swami Vivekananda foresaw what was coming. He said that this development would be seen 
in India, China, and all of the Eastern countries. He said it would be difficult to change the 
economic or mechanical trend; the people would not want it changed. His constructive idea was that 
the people must try to apply what he called "Practical Vedanta" in the economic as well as other 
departments of life. The great Swami meant that everyone must try to see the divinity in men and 
work for the good and happiness of all because of the common basis of existence.  
We do not admit that religion has failed. What has failed is the proper understanding of religion. 
People have forgotten the religious values of life; so they blame everything on religion. Religion 
has not been applied to everyday life; it has been forced back from life; it has been kept in the 
churches, temples, and synagogues. Religion is not mere observance of ceremonies and rituals. It is 
a way of life, both inner and outer, both individual and social. If it does not change our outlook on 
life, then it is no religion. So we propose that in social adjustment the spiritual values of life must 
be introduced. Again, we say that by spiritual values we mean the understanding and realization of 
God, the understanding of our soul, or, as Swami Vivekananda says, the manifestation of the 
divinity that is already in man, rather than sense pleasure or enjoyment or the accumulation of 
power. We are not bundles of material forces or mechanical machines, as modern naturalists or the 
old materialists tell us. We are basically spiritual beings. People need to be inspired with the idea 
that everyone is fundamentally spiritual whether Hindu, Christian, Jew, or Mohammedan. When 
people remember this and try to regulate their lives accordingly, then alone do they have a solution 
to social problems.  
People have their intellectual ideas, but if the emotions are not satisfied then the intellectual ideas 
are thrown aside. That is the case when the professors say that Christianity has failed. Religion has 
been divorced from life; the higher values have been separated from transitory or relative values. 
However, the relative values cannot be stabilizing elements. Children enjoy toys and dolls but 
mature people cannot do so. They have to change and move on to higher values. As individuals 
develop, they realize that the values they once used were all relative and temporary. The more they 
fortify themselves with the highest values of life the understanding and knowledge of God and the 
application of this knowledge in life the more they place relative values where they belong. The 
secret of adjustment lies in relegating relative values to their proper place and keeping the attention 
fixed on the supreme value of life. This requires self-restraint. The basis of social adjustment is self-
restraint, not self-expression in the erroneous sense. Many people think that unrestrained self-
expression is desirable. Some of our young friends take offense when we talk of self-restraint 
saying that it has a baneful effect, as some of the psychiatrists and psychologists think. Religious 
leaders all over the world will tell us that it is self-restraint that makes one happy and makes 
adjustment possible. Uncontrolled steam will never run a locomotive.  

	  
71	  
 
CHAPTER 9 
Escape Through Alcoholism 
ANY persons in modern society are disturbed about the extent of alcoholism. As a result 
of excessive and compulsive drinking, individuals are disorganized, families are 
disrupted, broader interpersonal relationships are upset. Medical men, clinical 
psychologists, psychiatrists, religious leaders, social workers, and other interested people are 
perplexed by this problem, as it affects the whole of society in various ways. It is encouraging that 
serious thinkers are trying to find the cause of and remedy for alcoholism and, thereby, to discover a 
solution for personal problems and interpersonal relationships, with a restoration of life's highest 
values.  
According to certain statistical reports, the total number of occasional, social, and heavy drinkers is 
calculated to be 64,000,ooo in the United States. Of these, about 9,000,000 are alcoholics. 
However, Marty Mann estimates the number of alcoholics as 4,000,000, according to the statistics 
of the Section on Alcohol Studies, Laboratory of Applied Physiology, Yale University.113 H. W. 
Haggard and E. M. Jellinek have revealed the magnitude of the problem by their various statistics in 
Alcohol Explored.114 Along with social scientists, psychotherapists, and many religious leaders, we 
are deeply concerned about this problem in its human aspects. The situation is indeed frightening.  
The very word alcoholism creates mixed feelings in different persons. Many religious leaders 
condemn it as a sinful act. In orthodox religious groups many laymen and clergymen create serious 
antipathy toward alcoholic addicts by their condemnation, in spite of the admonition of Jesus that 
sinners are to be loved and forgiven. Excessive drinking has indeed been the cause of destructive 
and painful experiences in modern society. But the condemnation of it has not solved the problem. 
On the contrary, unsympathetic handling of the situation by relatives, friends, religious leaders, 
social workers, and others has commonly driven the drinkers to further drinking. The old idea of 
sinfulness in the mind of an alcoholic or other disorganized person will never help in the solution of 
this problem, though moral responsibility is indicated. Many alcoholics are excluded from religious 
organizations because of this lack of understanding on the part of the leaders; with the unfortunate 
result that the alcoholic sufferers will develop hostility toward the religion itself. But if religion is 
worth anything it ought to be able to solve the problem, integrate the individuals, and stabilize their 
lives, by cultivating moral values and responsibility and developing will power provided however, 
the person is willing to be helped or can be made willing by sympathetic understanding and 
handling by relatives, religious leaders, therapists, and social workers. Those who condemn 
drinking and adopt the attitude that it is sinful can hardly find the cause of "must" drinking or 
alcoholism, as they cannot approach the problem scientifically or rationally.  
Why does one become alcoholic? Is the cause psychogenic or psychogenic? There have been 
different answers to these questions. Dr. Thomas Trotter, in 1788, was perhaps the first man to 
declare that alcoholism is a disease. His paper, "Essay, Medical, Philosophical, and Chemical, on 
Drunkenness," created a stir in those days among medical practitioners in Great Britain. There are 
evidences that in the Roman period thinkers like Seneca had come to a similar conclusion. Of 
course, deliberate and systematic studies on the cause of alcoholism and remedy for it have been 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
113	  Marty Mann, Primer on Alcoholism (New York: Rinehart & Co., Inc., 1950) P- vii  
114	  H. W. Haggard & E. M. Jellinek, Alcohol Explored (New York: Doubleday Doran & Co., Inc., 1942) .  
	  
M 

	  
72	  
made for the last fifty years. But the most effective efforts have been made during the last quarter 
century.  
Some are of the opinion that alcoholism is created by physiological defects. Dr. James J. Smith, 
who is of this school, says:– 
"Our laboratory and clinical studies of alcoholism during the past several years have convinced us 
that alcoholism is a metabolic disease. . . ."115  
Some medical authorities feel that physiological changes in the endocrine glands create the craving 
for alcohol. According to them, certain deficiencies in the chemicals of the body create the appetite.  
Others are of the opinion that alcoholism is psychological or psychogenic. Dr. James H. Wall writes 
that "compulsive drinking is a symptom and a result of personality disorder.”116 Others again think 
that the conditions of life — family situations and environmental factors — create the desire for 
alcohol, although the metabolic condition brings about a predisposition for the addiction. Some 
conclude that heredity is the cause.  
All these factors are contributing causes in this unfortunate disease, although we feel that the 
psychological element is the most important, both as cause and as cure. However, physical and 
environmental conditions must be taken fully into account in handling individuals suffering from 
chronic alcoholism.  
Not all those who drink alcoholic beverages are habitual drinkers. They may be classified in 
different groups such as social drinkers, occasional drinkers, heavy drinkers, and chronic alcoholics. 
It is known, however, that many of the social drinkers can become alcoholics, even though they 
start with the idea of enjoying fun, entertainment, and sociability. Many young people begin 
drinking in order to avoid being called sissies. We have seen and known many persons who have 
become real alcoholics though they started in fun.  
The individual suffers physically after he or she becomes a confirmed alcoholic. The nervous 
system is seriously damaged, producing all sorts of functional ailments or nerve diseases. Many of 
the deficiency diseases are created by heavy drinking. Cirrhosis of the liver is one of the 
characteristic diseases. Some are of the opinion that cancer may be caused by irritation from 
alcohol;117 although this has not been sufficiently supported by scientific investigation. All 
authorities agree, however, that heavy drinking has a serious effect on the physical system.  
Our own study of this disease is based on observation of psychological and religious causation and 
remedies. In spite of the physical elements that are involved, mere physical treatment in the form of 
medication and creation of repulsion, and building up of nerve and other deficiencies, does not 
stabilize an alcoholic and thereby stop his heavy and "must" drinking. So we offer suggestions for 
both therapists and patients.  
We observed in Chapters I and III that there are persons who take to drinking as a result of mental 
disturbances. The consciousness of guilt with the abnormal thought of sinfulness may cause an 
individual to drink in order to forget or "escape" his sense of guilt and sin. Some drinkers develop 
the habit because of inadequacy in life, frustration and tension created by conflicting emotions. 
Dissatisfaction with the environment, the family situation, or occupation can also create a mental 
state which stimulates the desire for alcohol and narcotics as a release from tension and frustration. 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
115	  James J. Smith, "A Medical Approach to Problem Drinking. Preliminary Report," Quarterly Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol (September, 1949). Dr. Smith is Director of Research on Alcoholism in New York University, Bellevue 
Hospital Medical Center.  
116	  James H. Wall, "Psychotherapy of Alcohol Addiction in a Private Mental Hospital” Quarterly Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol (March, 1945). 	  
117	  Haggard & Jellinek, Alcohol Explored, p. 193. 	  

	  
73	  
Sometimes, disturbances between husband and wife create tension which in turn becomes a cause 
of alcoholism. Many persons take to drinking in order to punish themselves or the other person 
concerned. We know a couple who have marital conflict because of differences in ideals, attitudes, 
and habits of life. The husband drinks not only because of frustration but also to punish himself. In 
another situation, a wife took up drinking in order to embarrass her husband; It can also be 
construed that she wanted to relieve the tension caused by the conflict between herself and her 
husband. As in the case of the professional man, described in Chapter I, there are similar instances 
of people turning to alcohol in order to forget the memory of unpleasant experiences. 
Maladjustment in the intimate marital relationship can also drive a man or woman to alcohol. From 
the study of many situations we are compelled to conclude that the psychological element is of vital 
importance in considering the solution of the disease.  
Hindu psychology not merely gives conceptual knowledge of the different states of mind and their 
functioning but it also teaches us how the emotions can be unified, redirected, and integrated. Its 
great emphasis is on the development of will.118 Stress is given to the potential power of the 
individual and methods for bringing out his inner strength, so that he himself can overcome his 
moral and psychological difficulties, including the habit of drinking. The conditions which produce 
the different types of alcoholism cannot be changed unless the total mind — thinking, feeling, and 
will — is harmoniously developed and integrated. We have seen time and again that individuals 
realize their moral inadequacy in their emotional reactions as well as in the formation of the 
drinking habit. They do not have sufficient will power to stop drinking, even though they realize the 
baneful effect on themselves and on those around them. Until a person develops will power along 
with the cultivation of moral responsibility, from the psychological and religious point of view, he 
is not able to overcome the drinking habit.  
Swami Vivekananda gives the message of strength. Again and again he insists that man must 
recognize and unfold his inner potentialities. He says:– 
 "Strength is life; weakness is death. Strength is felicity, life eternal, immortal; weakness is 
constant strain and misery…….." 119  
Then:– 
 "Strength is the medicine for the world's disease."120  
And again:–  
“People are taught from childhood that they are weak and sinners. Teach them that they are all 
glorious children of immortality, even those who are the weakest in manifestation. Let positive, 
strong, helpful thought enter into their brains from very childhood. Lay yourselves open to these 
thoughts, and not to weakening and paralyzing ones. . . . the infinite strength of the world is 
yours. Drive out the superstition that has covered your minds. Let us be brave. Know the Truth 
and practice the Truth. The goal may be distant, but awake, arise, and stop not till the goal is 
reached.”121  
There is a psychophysical parallelism (or interaction) as Professor Munsterberg and many other 
psychologists have concluded. The physical effects of alcoholism surely have bearing on mental 
states. It is our conviction that the psychological element is the starting point of the drinking habit, 
even though recent experiments suggest that there is considerable physical involvement. Once a 
person starts drinking alcohol his body begins to require it. This requirement disorganizes the 
mental condition which again stimulates more desire to drink. In this way the individual enters a 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
118	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology, chap. V, "Will and Personality." 	  
119	  Works. II, 3.	  
120	  Ibid., 201	  
121	  lbid., 87. 	  

	  
74	  
vicious circle. The mind functions considerably through the nervous system, and when mental 
disturbances arise, the nervous system is affected, the glands react, and vice versa. However, 
beyond the purely physical aspects of this sickness, attention should be given to strengthening and 
stabilizing the mind. Dr. Richard R. Peabody has this to say in his helpful book, Common Sense of 
Drinking:– 
 As the body and mind are indivisible parts of the same organism; the mind is naturally much 
more efficient in the vigorous execution of new ideas if it is functioning in a sound body……… 
122  
Many psychotherapists use what they call causative treatment. They try to remove the patient's 
emotional conflict and his inability to adjust himself to the different conditions of life through 
various methods of psychotherapy seeking out the cause. Others suggest a substitutive treatment by 
giving new channels of emotional satisfaction.123  
Alcoholics Anonymous is also doing splendid work in the form of group therapy. This organization 
gives both psychological and religious satisfaction, and under the leadership and guidance of 
Boston specialists like Dr. Flemming, Yale specialists, and other such medical authorities, is 
accomplishing a great deal. Many religious leaders are also helping the heavy drinkers of different 
categories.  
From the point of view of Hindu psychology, we can offer some constructive ideas for remedial 
purposes. Hindu psychologists recognize that the first requirement for the sick person is the 
cultivation of the desire for recovery from the illness. Herein lies the utility of the presence of the 
psychotherapist, counselor, or religious leader. The person who is suffering from this disease 
generally cannot get a desire for recovery without outside help. In many instances, the members of 
the family, being victims of the alcohol problem, lose patience and take disparaging and 
discouraging attitudes toward the drinker. A religious teacher or therapist can be helpful if he is 
extremely patient, affectionate, and sympathetic to the suffering person. Alcoholics are not merely 
sinful persons, as it is frequently construed, even though their condition is often due to moral 
defects. They are suffering from mental and physical deficiencies; and as such they need 
consideration and affection, not criticism and condescending treatment. Even if they are "sinners," 
they merit equal love. The psychotherapists and religious leaders must communicate a sense of deep 
interest in clients or students and in their recovery. Sympathetic treatment inspires patients to 
cultivate the desire for recovery.  
A veteran came to his religious leader, attracted by his teachings. He was a regular alcoholic. With 
encouragement, sympathy, and affection from his teacher, he became a thoroughgoing follower of 
his teachings. He not only gave up his old habit but he changed his ways of life thoroughly. It is 
also found that when affection and sympathy are not shown, one cannot do anything for the 
alcoholics. We know another veteran intimately who is not yet changing the course of his life 
because he is not getting what is a basic requirement for such a sick person, namely, healthy 
occupation, kind atmosphere, affectionate surroundings. Above all he needs much encouragement. 
We are convinced that if this young man could be persuaded to believe that he has the capacity to 
get out of his illness, if he could be given a healthy occupation in a harmonious, friendly 
atmosphere, and he could remain in contact with an affectionate and sympathetic religious leader 
for some time, he could recover. The time element is important, as we have seen in the case of the 
professional man, because it takes time to form new habits of emotional satisfaction and cultivation 
of dynamic conviction within his own capacity. Swami Vivekananda's message of Strength is 
important in the process of reintegration.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
122	  Richard R. Peabody, The Common Sense of Drinking (Boston: Little, Brown, & Co., 1931), p. 188. 	  
123	  The chapter on Inebriety in Haggard and Jellinek, Alcoholism Explored, deals extensively with these two methods. 	  

	  
75	  
In the second place, proper medication under the supervision of a good physician is of vital 
importance in extreme cases. Some physicians make use of antabuse, but it has been known to have 
no durable effect. Aversion treatment or conditioned reflex treatment may be effective in some 
situations provided that psychotherapy is used along with it. Use of vitamins and the temporary use 
of sedatives and drugs have often helped immensely. In the early stages of drinking, nonalcoholic 
hot beverages can remove the desire for alcohol. Such hot drinks may, for example, be helpful if 
given regularly to the potential alcoholic on his return home from work. This simple treatment has 
been very beneficial in many cases where the drinking habit is not far advanced.  
As a third requirement, the patient should have a certain type of occupation to keep his mind 
engaged, provided that he is kept in a harmonious atmosphere where he will not be looked down 
upon because of his illness. It should be kept constantly in mind that these patients have definite 
problems of maladjustment and a deep sense of insecurity and such other mental and emotional 
disturbances. They are often very sensitive. Knowing this, the members of the family, co-workers, 
and therapists should always encourage alcoholics and eliminate the idea that they are ineffectual in 
their interpersonal relationships and adjustments in life. As we have stressed in other chapters in 
regard to mental and emotional integration, they should be taught gradually the ways of 
adaptability. It is indeed a process of re-education, as some of the clinical psychologists would say.  
The next point to be remembered is to create confidence in the patients in the performance of their 
respective duties and in their own capacity for harmonious and normal interpersonal relationships.  
The practice of concentration and meditation, discussed in Chapter 16, is extremely important.124 It 
is true that it takes time to develop will power. But we have seen time and again that as a man 
begins his practice of meditation and other devotional exercises and follows the requirements 
mentioned above, he forms new habits of adjustment and satisfaction in social contacts and 
successful execution of his duties and responsibilities r He learns to face the realities of life, instead 
of avoiding them. With this method, alcoholics and drug-addicts can develop sufficient will power 
to cast off the baneful habit of drinking and taking of narcotics. The problems of alcoholism can be 
overcome if the patients are under the guidance of an integrated therapist or religious leader who 
has sympathy for the patients and if the patients have confidence in him.  
The most important requirement advanced by Hindu psychology, is to strengthen their conviction 
that they are inseparably connected with God. They are potentially divine. As Sankara says: "The 
human soul is divine." And as Swami Vivekananda says:– 
 Each soul is potentially divine. The goal is to manifest this divine within, by controlling nature, 
external and internal. Do this either by work, or worship, or psychic control, or philosophy, by 
one, or more, or all of these and be free. This is the whole of religion. Doctrines, or dogmas, or 
rituals, or books, or temples, or forms, are but secondary details.125  
The patients should constantly be guided to believe that they are not useless and worthless persons. 
The mine of strength is within them. Therapists and religious leaders should definitely inculcate this 
idea in them time and again. It creates conviction in the drinkers and in their potentialities. They can 
also be helped to remember that their neighbors and colleagues are not essentially superior to them. 
Just because drinkers cannot do exactly what their friends and acquaintances do, they need not feel 
that they are inferior and incapacitated. They, too, can succeed in something in which they can be 
effective. It should be noted here that with this understanding of the divinity of man and his real 
nature, or their inseparable connection with God, they can succeed in everything. This will take 
away the paralyzing and hypnotic suggestions of their inadequacy and insufficiency. This spirit of 
divinity of man should be inculcated in the patients. They themselves should remember this. It is 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
124	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology, chap. 5, "Will and Personality."  
125	  Works, I, 118. 	  

	  
76	  
the duty of the therapist and religious leader to strengthen this conviction in their patients in every 
possible way. The reading of encouraging and elevating religious books and discussion with 
persons who can inspire them individually and in groups, are very helpful.  
The question may arise as to whether a person not interested in religion can be helped. Our answer 
is that if the therapist can inspire the patient by his own integrity and personality, and above all by 
his sympathy and patience, he can help and cure an alcoholic by his life if not by his beliefs. Of 
course, we believe that if a person can be consciously influenced by religious ideals, the result will 
be more effective for the development of the total personality. But religion is a power greater than 
any creed. Religious practices develop will power to avoid alcoholism. 
 

	  
77	  
CHAPTER 10 
Power of Mind 
HERE is tremendous power inherent in the mind. Unfortunately, few people realize that they 
possess this power and they behave as if they were weak and have nothing to contribute to 
this world and their own happiness. If they would study their own mind they would find the 
strength in it and they would be able to use it to their own advantage and for the benefit of others.  
All of the achievements of human society are the direct result of the power of mind. Scientific 
discoveries are made because of intellectual power. The scientist concentrates his mental forces on 
his work; he gets sudden flashes of knowledge. He applies his findings in experiments and 
contributes something to the world for the control of nature. Primitive man was frightened and 
mystified by the forces of nature. He identified them with divine power and worshipped them. 
Today, with his intellectual achievements modern man challenges the forces of nature without fear. 
He controls and uses them for both constructive and destructive purposes.  
All the joys that people have in life — aesthetic, artistic, poetic, literary — are direct contributions 
of the human mind. Primitive man did not know how to use his mind; consequently, he was 
completely oblivious of his mental powers and he could not share his ideas. Me might have felt 
inspiration from the beauties of nature but he was unable to express it. In a cultured society the 
sense of beauty can be communicated. The poetry of Browning, Wordsworth, Keats, Shelley, and of 
Shakespeare above all, the works of Hindu poets and dramatists like Kalidas and Girish Ghosh, or 
German writers like Goethe and Schelling, and French writers like Moltere and Racine, give an 
intense aesthetic intellectual satisfaction. The masterpieces of some of the great composers of 
Europe are tremendously inspiring. The religious music of the Hindu composers Tansen, Surdas, 
Mirabai, and Tagore is wonderful and transports one to a higher plane of consciousness.  
Although an individual has the greatest joy in life when he uses fully his powers of mind, many 
people are not aware of this. Most people are still frightened by nature; consciously or 
unconsciously, the primitive tendency lingers because of ignorance of the physical constitution. 
Many persons are frightened by disease. It is true that influenza, colds, virus infections, and such 
diseases are prevalent all over the world. Cancer, malaria, tuberculosis, and bubonic plague are 
destructive ailments. People have reason to be afraid of them. Fear of them disturbs the mind, 
creating many functional diseases. Little do they understand that the mind has the power at least to 
overcome psychosomatic diseases, as we explained in the first chapter. So even from a medical 
point of view it is worth while to remember that the mind is inherently powerful. If people do not 
manifest that mental power, they succumb to all kinds of little disturbances and cannot even keep 
their bodies healthy.  
The question will arise: If it is an accepted fact that everyone possesses a powerful mind, then why 
don't they use it? The answer is that most people are not aware that they possess it. Suppose that a 
man leaves his friend a legacy of a million dollars in the bank. If the friend does not know that he 
possesses this money he will not use it. He will not be benefited by it even though it may be in his 
name. Only when he knows about it can he do anything with it. The same is true of mental power. 
Then also a man must know how to use what is in his possession and not dissipate it.   A man may 
possess wealth but he can dissipate everything by not knowing how to make the best use of it. 
Similarly, even if a person knows that he has power of mind and can use it, he can still direct it for 
destructive purposes, as we find in the case of many scholars and scientists who misused that power 
by discovering implements for the destruction of humanity during the last World War. It is true that 
theoretical scientists like Einstein and others gave the basic ideas of atomic energy, yet other men 
with great mental powers used them for destructive purposes and thereby helped to demoralize 
T 

	  
78	  
humanity. Other scholars have become disintegrated themselves and have had to be hospitalized as 
the result of inordinate ambition and emotional tension, due to improper use of their minds. Dr. Carl 
Binger126 and others, discussing the principles of psychosomatic medicine, indicate what a 
devastating effect the misuse of the mind has on the human personality.  
In a mysterious way human beings remain oblivious of what they possess. The Hindus call this 
ignorance Maya or nescience, a cosmic ignorance which covers man's true nature and gives rise to 
something else. They give a pertinent illustration. On a dark night when a person sees the trunk of a 
tree, he takes it to be a ghost, thief, friend, policeman, and so forth, according to his preconceived 
notion. When people have preconceived notions about certain things they interpret them as they 
like. Suppose someone has an idea that certain types of persons are no good. The moment he sees a 
man of that type he jumps to the conclusion that the man is no good. He does not have the 
objectivity to discriminate.  
Recently the editor of a religious journal requested us to write an article showing the relationship 
between the Hindus and the Christians. An eminently devout person wrote a letter criticizing the 
article, not from an objective or an intellectual point of view, but by attacking the personality of the 
writer. He did not know the writer at all, but he had formed an idea that certain persons are 
undesirable; therefore, he thought that a Hindu must be a bad person. He had no real knowledge of 
the writer's actual character. What can be done with such preconceived notions? Certainly, you 
cannot find the truth with them.  
When people are hypnotized by themselves and by others, they cannot know what they are. If they 
have been constantly told that they are weaklings; that they are helpless; that they have nothing to 
contribute to themselves and to the world; how can they know what they possess? From our infancy 
our well-meaning parents, with their preconceived notions about the ways and behavior of children, 
impose certain ideas on us. Often we hear the remark: "Oh, this child does not know anything. He 
doesn't understand what is happening." How do they know how much the child understands? It is 
amazing to observe the intuitive or instinctive power of a child.  
When one of our brother monks was very young, his older sister died during a cholera epidemic in 
India, leaving a little baby. Many other members of the family also died, leaving only an old 
grandmother and grandfather. That this little child felt what had happened to her life was indicated 
by the manner in which she behaved. She was actually afraid to meet anyone. It was interesting to 
observe how a little child, a few months old, could sense her loss. She could not be told that her 
mother and other relatives had died, as she was so young. Yet that baby knew what was missing in 
her life. People do not realize how much a child senses and feels, yet they say: "This child does not 
understand anything” They inculcate certain habits in the children because of their own actions.  
Take lying, for instance. Parents may often lie, not thinking that the child will learn to do the same 
thing. When a telephone call comes, the mother tells Johnnie: "Say that Mother is out." He is taught 
to lie without thinking about it. Then when he lies in some other way the mother scolds and 
disciplines him. In an unintentional way negative ideas are given to the children. Parents often 
almost hypnotize them with wrong impressions and ideas. Later on the children show them in their 
behavior pattern and their reactions to the world. They gradually lose the power to control, guide, or 
develop their own mind.  
On the other hand, we know of parents or guardians who have encouraged their children 
tremendously. The hypnotic spell of "good for nothing" was broken. These children developed a 
great deal of power in their lives as adults. In an Indian story there was a princess who was well-
versed in Vedanta doctrines of life, immortality of soul, and divine power of man. When she was 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
126	  Carl Binger, The Doctor's Job (London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1947).  
	  

	  
79	  
bringing up her little child, she would always sing the great words of Vedanta, "Thou art That, thou 
art divine." This little boy used to hear his mother humming over and over, "Thou art divine; thou 
art divine." As a result, when he grew up he manifested tremendous power of mind.  
Just as negative ideas hypnotize an individual, the positive, constructive, creative ideas dehypnotize 
him. He can bring out his latent power and show what he really is. Everyone needs to remind 
himself of the power that he possesses. If some modern scientists can control physical nature, we do 
not see why an individual cannot control his own physical nature. Whatever is in the macrocosm is 
in the microcosm also. If the forces of atomic energy can be controlled with the help of intelligence, 
surely a man can control the particles of his own body. Of course, even the scientists who have been 
using this atomic energy are now frightened by it themselves. Some thinkers in this country are 
frightened because the Russians are vigorously using the German scientists and accomplishing what 
this country has accomplished, and perhaps even more. They are afraid because they are not sure 
what the other fellow is doing; and they are oblivious of their own power.  
Everyone should have the full knowledge of the power that he possesses as well as a proper 
understanding of its use. Most people are not able to express their power of mind even when they 
know they have it, because their will power is weak and their emotions disintegrated. 
Unfortunately, mere intellectual knowledge of mental power is not sufficient. Otherwise, the world 
would not be what it is today. At a recent conference, a philosopher said that the Sermon on the 
Mount has been taught to us for the last two thousand years; yet see what we have been doing. 
People may have intellectual knowledge of the Sermon on the Mount; they may have intellectual 
knowledge of the Gospel of Buddha or other such teachings; yet if their emotions are not integrated, 
their inner power cannot be manifested.  
That is the reason that people have to go through certain types of psycho-physical exercise in order 
to maintain and develop their mental powers. There may be a question that the term "psycho-
physical," implies a parallelism between the mental and physical processes, as Professor Hugo 
Munsterberg and others in the West have thought. We wish to make our position clear that there is 
no dualism between mind and body; these two are not independent entities. They are interrelated 
and are the functioning of the same force in grosser and subtler forms. For the sake of 
understanding, we can safely say that for the time being the mind is dependent upon the body. 
When the body is disturbed or agitated, the mind is also disturbed. On occasions when the nerves 
are disturbed, the mind is also jumpy; and when the mind is in this state the nerves become 
shattered. When the mind is serene the nerves behave properly; it works both ways.  
Can the mind act independently of the nervous system?127 First, let us think of the things that we 
observe through the nervous system with our sense organs and instruments. A person sees a flower 
and smells the fragrance. This experience stimulates the nervous system and consequently the 
mental process. The individual thinks; he has an emotional or intellectual reaction, good or bad; and 
when the reaction is strong, he acts. These three functions: thinking, feeling, and willing, go 
together. They are interrelated and are constantly stimulated by certain sense perceptions. The mind 
functions in this way now, but there comes a time in the life of an individual when the mind can act 
independently of the nervous system. It does not then depend on direct sense perceptions. In this 
connection, we think of what some Western psychologists call extrasensory perception.128 The mind 
possesses the power to see things, not through the medium of sense contact yet just as directly and 
immediately as things are ordinarily perceived through the senses. The mind possesses the power to 
perceive what is going on in distant places and also on a subtle plane beyond the range of ordinary 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
127	   Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology, pp. 30-32. According to Hindu psychologists, the internal sense or 
implement for perception is the indriya. Although it operates through the outer sense organs and the nervous system it 
is independent of them.  
128	  lbid. chaps. 9 and 10.  

	  
80	  
perception. These subtle powers are popularly known as psychic and occult powers. There are many 
fraudulent claims, yet many cases are authentic and have been verified.129 These experiences may 
be misconstrued by many objective scientists as illusory and imaginary; but the investigations of 
psychical research societies and psychologists, such as Professor Joseph B. Rhine, Professor 
Gardner Murphy, and their colleagues, suggest to us that these experiences are within the range of 
the human mind. Indian psychologists, like Patanjali and others, not only believe in the possibility 
of such experiences but also give methods for developing these subtle mental powers through the 
practice of concentration.130  
Indian psychologists are emphatic in their declaration of the existence of these subtle powers and of 
the possibility of developing them through exact scientific methods of subjective experimentation. 
When a man develops subtle powers of mind, he can perceive things directly and immediately 
without the medium of the sense organs and nervous system. That is the time the mind perceives 
things as they really are and not through interpretation. Even the great scientists, who are supposed 
to be objective, perceive things through interpretation of the mind. That is the reason that Professor 
A. S. Eddington, in his Philosophy of Physical Science, comes to the conclusion that even scientific 
objective knowledge is relative.131 For the same reason philosopher Kant tells us that the thing-in-
itself is unknown and unknowable. What we know of the world or of the thing is nothing but the 
interpretation of the way the thing-in-itself affects our consciousness.132 Professor Eddington comes 
to his conclusion from scientific observation while philosopher Kant gets his knowledge, 
understanding, or flash through the flight of intellectualism or reasoning. Both of them, practically, 
come to the same conclusion as some of the Hindu philosophers do, namely, that Brahman or 
Reality cannot be perceived by the mind. The Hindu philosophers go a little further and say that 
there comes a stage in the course of the mind's development when the transformed mind perceives 
the Reality. In its "present state, the mind functions as the body dictates or as the nerves react. 
Today there is a little change in the climate or there is a little physical irritation and the person 
becomes sick. Tomorrow there may be some other disorder of the body and the person becomes 
irritable. We see how the experience of physical change colors his perception. He may think he is 
independent, but he is a slave to the body for the time being. That is the reason the great Hindu 
teachers tell us that we have to go through psycho-physical exercises for the time being, so that the 
body may remain fairly healthy. We say fairly healthy rather than perfect. Perfection of the body is 
a misnomer for the body constantly changes. When the body is fairly normal, then it does not 
disturb a person's mind with too many ailments. This is the time to dehypnotize the mind and 
manifest its power.  
When a person does certain spiritual exercises or practices concentration or meditation, he finds that 
the latent power of the mind emerges. As he goes through these practices his emotions become 
organized and unified. People may find it difficult to understand and control the emotions. We do 
not ask anyone to repress his emotions; rather we ask him to transform or change the course of 
these emotions and direct them to higher channels to the divine. When he gradually succeeds in 
doing this, then the mental forces and emotions will be purified. Along with this redirection of the 
emotions, comes the practice of concentration. This practice unifies all the mental forces. When the 
mind is focused on anything, it has to remain quiet. A man who is performing experiments in the 
scientific laboratory is absorbed there because all other thoughts or emotional reactions are 
eliminated. When a mother is giving attention to the child all other thoughts are eliminated from her 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
129	  Ibid  
130	  Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali, chap. III. See also "Raja Yoga," Works, I. 	  
131	  A. S. Eddington, Philosophy of Physical Science (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1939). 	  
132	  8 Immanuel Kant, Critik der Reinen Bernunft (Riga: verlegts Johann Friederich Hartknoch, 1781). See also Kant's 
Critique of Pure Reason, trans. F. Max Muller (London: Macmillan & Co., 1881), Vol. II; and Immanuel Kant's 
Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith (New York: The Humanities Press, 1950); and other translations.  

	  
81	  
mind. When an artist is painting a picture, all other ideas or emotions are temporarily put aside. 
When a man concentrates his mind on God, all other ideas, associations, and emotions are 
forgotten. Of course, it is difficult to attain to that state or remain in it. Yet through practice and 
detachment one can attain it. Sri Krishna tells us:– 
 "Without doubt . . . the mind is restless, and difficult to control; but through practice and 
renunciation ... it may be governed."133  
Again He says:– 
"When the completely controlled mind rests serenely in the Self alone, free from longing after all 
desires, then is one called steadfast, (in the Self)."134  
Similarly, Patanjali, the father of Hindu psychology, says that by these two methods of detachment 
and constant practice, the ''uncontrollable" mind can be subdued.  
All latent powers of the mind are manifested when integration takes place. We then know the real 
dynamics of the mind. At that time functional diseases vanish. When a man has no emotional 
conflict, frustration, sense of insecurity, he has no anxiety or worry and his mind is peaceful. He 
may have organic trouble because of his age; or his body may deteriorate; or he may get some other 
disease; but he will not have functional trouble produced by the disturbed condition of the 
emotions. His nerves will remain strong and he can accomplish what he wishes, fully controlling 
his physical reaction. Some people have seen cancer patients. The excruciating pain a patient 
suffers cannot be described. Sri Ramakrishna had cancer of the throat. When the doctors would go 
to treat it, He would say to them: "Wait a minute." After a short time He would add: "Now you can 
go on." He had withdrawn His mind completely from the body. Then the doctors could do anything, 
for He could not feel it. We never saw Sri Ramakrishna; we saw His disciples. Swami Turiyananda, 
one of the disciples, had to undergo a serious operation. His heart was weak because of age and 
long suffering. The doctors were hesitant about giving him an anesthetic. They reported this to 
Swami Brahmananda, our Master, who was then President of the Ramakrishna Mission. Swami 
Brahmananda went to the bedroom of the sick Swami and said: "You will just have to endure!" The 
Swami replied: "Yes, Maharaj, certainly." And all the preparations were made for this major 
operation in his room. He began to talk about Brahman to some of the young Swamis who were 
present while the operation was going on. The surgeon was amazed. After finishing everything he 
asked: "Swami, can you sing a song?" And Swami Turiyananda sang a devotional song. His mind 
was completely withdrawn from the body. There was not the slightest distortion of the facial 
muscles during the operation.  
Sri Ramakrishna used to say that when Jesus was crucified, He withdrew His mind completely from 
His body; He was in another state altogether, a state of samadhi or super consciousness. The nails 
pierced through His body but the mind was unaffected. Sri Ramakrishna gave an illustration of how 
this could happen. When the coconut is not yet ripe, the fibers, kernel, and shell are inseparable. But 
when the coconut is ripe, the kernel becomes separate. You can shake it and feel the kernel jump 
around inside. When a person is thoroughly established in higher spiritual practices, his mind and 
body become separated. His soul is separate, too.  
The objective of everyone should be to bring out his own mental power. Many of us may say that 
we are not like Christ, Sri Ramakrishna, or Swami Turiyananda. We are ordinary people. It is true 
that we are ordinary in the usual sense; but we still have that divine spark; we still possess that mine 
of power in us. The difference is that we have hypnotized ourselves and we are continuing to do so. 
However, we can be dehypnotized by constant, positive thoughts, like the child of the Indian 
princess. We should remind ourselves that we are divine. We should remind ourselves that there is a 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
133	  Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita 6:18. 	  
134	  lbid, 6: 35. 	  

	  
82	  
reservoir of strength within us. We should tell ourselves that the petty changes in the world should 
not affect our mind. How disturbed we become if a man looks this way or talks that way! How the 
little things disturb and agitate us and make our minds go to pieces 1 The more we give our 
attention to higher phases of life the less we shall be affected by adverse circumstances. We do not 
know if anyone can be found who is not subject to them. Even Jesus and Sri Ramakrishna had their 
sad experiences. Jesus; an incarnation of God, was crucified. Can anyone think that there will not be 
any change of condition in this life? It is unthinkable to look at things in this light. We have to face 
conditions as they are. We have to be unaffected by them and manifest our hidden, latent power of 
mind. We have no reason for frustration and conflict. We can overcome anxiety and apprehension. 
We possess the power to face the problems of life and internal and external changes; and we have 
the power to overcome all mental weaknesses. Then we can dehypnotize ourselves and gradually 
manifest our will power, so that we can carry out the ideas that we have in life for our own 
betterment and for the good of society.  
 In giving attention to the Abiding Spirit we will find that mental power will be manifest. It is 
nothing unusual. The difference that we see between one man and another and their achievements is 
due to the degree of manifestation of mental power. Some cultivate and express it, in different 
spheres of life, while others dissipate it and become disintegrated. It is of primary importance for 
everyone to consider how to use the best we have in us to full advantage. Then alone can we 
contribute something worth while to our life and to the lives of others. No great contribution can be 
made to life by a disturbed mind. Disturbances of the mind can be fully controlled as we manifest 
the real power in us and become free. Then we can say: "Mind can bind one; mind can liberate 
one."  
 

	  
83	  
CHAPTER 11 
Power of Love 
HE vast majority of those who seek a higher life find it most attractive to follow the path of 
love because it is a natural expression of the human mind. Swami Vivekananda says that 
through the expression of love individuals can establish emotional relationships with the 
Supreme Being, with Bliss Itself. However, many will ask: "How can you say that the path of love 
is so enjoyable? We show our love to others and then we suffer." That is true; but it is envy, 
jealousy, and such tendencies that rob the people of joy or bliss of love. Unfortunately, many suffer 
from these tendencies. So we should clarify the meaning of love. Although there is much talk about 
it among different religious groups, few understand its true nature. Consequently, they get into 
difficulties.  
In life we observe three types of love. The first form of love is immature and childish. Children 
have their minds focused on themselves. This is generally regarded as narcissism or self-love, 
according to the mythical story of Narcissus. A child begins his life with this attitude but he must 
outgrow it and expand himself if he wants to live the fullness of life. When individuals remain self-
centered they invariably become anti-social, unhappy, and consequently neurotic. Professor O. 
Hobart Mowrer, in his experience with clinical psychology, gives clear insight into the problems of 
immature love relationships.135  Immature love is based on selfish expectations. This should hardly 
be called love. Many people direct their sentiment to the object of affection but they expect 
everything in return. Therefore, they are often disappointed. They continually demand and expect 
attention in material things or emotional demonstration. The average person asks before he gives; 
he figures how much he will get out of giving. Often the sacred matrimonial relationship is 
established on this basis. We can cite a number of cases illustrating this fact.  
A man began to give a great deal of attention to the young daughter of a friend of ours, who was to 
inherit a great fortune. She was flattered by the unusual attention of this man and she lost herself in 
his emotional expressions to the point that she was persuaded to marry him secretly. It soon became 
evident that he married her only for the fortune of her wealthy parents. After a few years, this fact 
was proven by his ill treatment of her when her parents would not become reconciled with either of 
them and it became evident that he had no hope of sharing in the fortune. As a result of her 
frustration and disappointment, this girl lost her mental control, for she really believed in his love 
for her. The mother had to go all the way to California from the Eastern part of the country to 
rescue her from an institution where her husband had placed her. Even though she was rescued from 
her designing husband, this experience created such a disturbance in her mind that she ultimately 
committed suicide a victim of selfish and insincere love.  
There have been many such marriages and love affairs which were motivated by material gain and 
emotional expectation. Invariably, these situations satisfy neither the lover nor the beloved. People 
cannot have satisfaction when they do not give love. This kind of emotion is not love; it is 
fascination based on gain. Consequently, there is no joy in it, since the persons who are always 
demanding are bound to be frustrated. Besides, the object of the supposed love will sooner or later 
realize the base motive of the other individual. Then there will be no warmth of affection and no 
understanding, even though they may have been present in the beginning due to a certain kind of 
attraction.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
135	  O. Hobart Mowrer, Neurosis and Its Treatment (Chicago: The Delphinian Society, 1949), p. 757. (Reprinted from 
Patterns for Modern Living, Division I, "Psychological Patterns").  
	  
T 

	  
84	  
This situation is not only present in worldly associations; amazingly enough it exists even in 
religious expressions. The majority of people approach God to get something out of Him. There are 
some persons who are associated with religion in order  to attain health, wealth, prosperity, name, 
fame, and so on. Sometimes they join certain religious organizations thinking that it will be 
profitable for their social or economic position. Many of them associate with religious organizations 
because they will gain prestige, in the same way that a college degree is often taken to get prestige.  
We know of interesting cases of this kind, where the individuals were interested in worldly 
achievements. About ten years ago a young lady came to us because she was disturbed about certain 
problems in her life. During her association with us, her mother-in-law insisted that her husband 
join a particular church so that both his social position and his job might be secure. The lady finally 
joined that church with her husband. Some time ago, another man joined a religious group because 
he was a "social climber" and he knew that there were a number of people with wealth and social 
position in that group. He had not the slightest intention of any kind of religious development. Later 
on, when he had established his prestige he left the group, showing that his expectation had been 
satisfied without love of God.  
So there are many who think in terms of: "Oh God, give me this; give me that." Once the great 
Muslim Emperor of India, Akbar, met a holy man. He wanted to offer something to this holy person 
so he begged of him: "Come to my palace so that I may present you with a gift." The offer was 
accepted and they arrived at the palace just at the time of prayer. The Emperor knelt and began to 
pray aloud. When the holy man heard the Emperor's words "Oh God, give me ……." he got up and 
started to walk away. Akbar finished his prayer and saw him leaving. He ran after him and asked: 
"Sir, why are you going away without accepting my gift?" The holy man replied: "Well, I do not 
want anything from a beggar. You are seeking this and that from God. What can you give to me?"  
It is interesting that not only many ordinary people seek money, health, prosperity, children, home, 
success, power, position, and everything else from God but also many so-called religious persons, 
who use their relationship with God or man to get something. They love God with the hope of 
getting their own way. 
The second form of love includes a sense of mutuality, I give and you give. I worship God and He 
gives me something. I love my children and they return that love. It may be love, consideration, or 
security that is involved; but whatever it may be, it is mutual. No doubt this form of love is better 
than the spirit of demanding. Where there is all expectation there is sure to be envy or jealousy. In 
this second form, too, envy and jealousy are often observed. When a person gives love, affection, 
thought, and consideration with expectation of return, he becomes jealous if anyone seems to come 
between him and the object of his affection. Parents become jealous of their children or the children 
of their parents. A father becomes jealous of his child lest it usurp the affection of his wife. A 
mother becomes jealous of her grown-up daughter or son lest he or she take away part of her 
husband's love. It is a pathological condition but it is present in the competitive societies of the 
modern world.  
We have known cases where our services were required for young married couples because one or 
the other was jealous of the mother-in-law for fear that she would continue her attention to her son 
or daughter, as the case might be. These situations are not as rare as we may want to think. So even 
though this second form of love is nobler than the first, it is still full of anxiety, apprehension, 
worry, and other disturbing elements. Consequently, even this does not satisfy the inner nature of 
man and does not give the real joy of love. There have been many persons who transcended the 
sense of expectation and selfishness even in this form of mutual love and they have become 
extremely unselfish, devoting themselves to the good and happiness of the beloved. This 
cooperative love has the possibility of gradual evolution through unselfishness.  

	  
85	  
In the field of religion, also, we find many persons who give up their interest when they find they 
cannot get something out of God in return for their devotion. We remember a man who lost his 
religious incentive because a tidal wave in New- England destroyed so many lives and so much 
property in 1938. Some people lose their religious intensity when they face misfortune or changes 
in life, thinking that God has not given them what they deserved in return for their devotion and 
prayers to Him.  
The third form of love has no such elements because the lover gives and gives and demands nothing 
and expects nothing material in return, even though he receives from his beloved what is required. 
There is no sense of demanding in this form of love. If love comes, well and good. If it does not, 
well and good. "I do not care for anything in return for my love." Love is un-mercenary. There are 
few persons in the world, even those associated with friends and relatives, who have the sentiment 
of giving with no thought of return. There are a few, a blessed few, who offer themselves wholly to 
God, who express love for Him without caring for any reward from Him.  The moment a person 
expects anything in return for his love, that moment the joy of love goes and it deteriorates to the 
level of the shopkeeper.) This is described by Swami Vivekananda in one of his poems:–  
Aye, born heir to the Infinite thou art,  
Within the heart is the ocean of Love,  
"Give," "give away," — whoever asks return,  
His ocean dwindles down to a mere drop.136  
 
Girish Ghosh, the great Indian dramatist, composed a hymn describing the highest state of love. 
"Oh, why does a lover want love! The moment you give and take and exchange your love, that very 
moment the whole of love vanishes. The joy of love disappears." How true this is! Few persons can 
understand the depth of this idea. A real lover does not even expect kindness from the beloved. 
Even though he may be kicked, he still pours out his love. "Though he slay me, yet will I trust him." 
This does not mean that he is a masochist in finding satisfaction through punishment and 
humiliation; it means only forgiveness and endurance under all conditions because of the intense 
love for the beloved.  
There may be a misunderstanding that this third form of love means a sense of superiority or 
condescension. In the act of so-called charity one has a sense of superiority, feeling that he 
possesses something more than another which he is giving to fulfill the requirements of the other. 
But in the third form of love there is no such consciousness in the lover. He does not even remain 
self-conscious in the act of love. In fact, he loses himself in it. As a poet has said: "I lost myself in 
Him." When a man directs this kind of love to God he does not demand anything from Him nor 
does he expect anything in return. He pours out his love to God without being conscious of this act. 
Nevertheless, he receives intense love from God as well as everything that is required for his well-
being. This attitude does not contradict the idea of loving cooperation between God and man, as 
advocated by the personalist philosophers of America. Their attitude is that of the devotee who 
gives to God with no expectation of reward. This is cooperation in the higher sense of the term and 
not as the average man understands it in human relationships.137 Sri Ramakrishna describes this 
love:– 
 The stage of devotion called Bhava is like an unripe mango; Prema is like the ripe fruit. Prema is 
like a string in the hands of the Bhakta [lover of God], binding him to that Sacchidananda 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
136	  Works, IV, 429. 	  
137	  Edgar Sheffield Brightman, A Philosophy of Religion (New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1940), pp. 455-456. Also 
Nature and Values (New York: Abingdon-Cokesbury Press, 1945), p. 165. 	  

	  
86	  
[Existence-Knowledge-Bliss] which is God. The devotee holds the Lord, so to speak, under his 
control. God comes to him whenever he calls.138  
It is so satisfying that the lover's whole being becomes full of joy, so much so that he has all the 
different spiritual realizations because of his love for God. Many devotees consider that spiritual 
realizations come in the form of revelation from God and the devotees or lovers have little part to 
play in them. However, we understand from the lives of the mystics and devotees of the different 
religions that the devotees have love from God and revelations or spiritual experiences of various 
types because they pour out their own love to Him. In fact, the devotees with intense love are sure 
to have all the experiences of God.  
There is a story told in India about a lover by the name of Vilwamangal. He was in love with a 
prostitute who lived across the river from his house. Being the son of a wealthy man he gave 
everything to her to make her comfortable. He spent a lot of time with her, disregarding his own 
personal duties and responsibilities which were left with the servants. His love for her was so strong 
that even on the day of the funeral ceremony of his father he wanted to go to her. In the evening, 
after the ceremony, he left the rest of the details to his servants and started out. Just at that time a 
bad storm arose with thunder, wind, and torrential rain. His boat was washed away from the bank of 
the river, so  he jumped into the water and started to swim, so anxious was he to reach his beloved. 
He was becoming exhausted by the waves when he touched something in the dark that was floating 
near him. He caught hold of it and went the rest of the way across the river with its help. He was so 
intent on reaching the woman that he did not know that he was hanging on to a dead body. When he 
reached her place the gate was locked so he scaled the wall. When he was admitted to the house, the 
woman was frightened at his appearance; he was in such a pathetic condition. He was wet and 
covered with mud and blood and stood there looking at her. When she knew who he was she was 
amazed. "Well, are you mad that you come at this time of the night in the storm when everything is 
so bad?" she exclaimed. Then she added: "I understand that if a man loves God in this way he can 
realize God." At the moment Vilwamangal was unconscious of her words. He was only looking at 
her. But the words penetrated his mind. They meant the beginning of a change in him. His intense 
love for this woman was later turned to God and he became a saint. She, too, became a transformed 
person, when she realized what a change had taken place in her lover. His love for her and his 
spiritual power affected her immensely and transformed her. This happened because the man was a 
true lover.  
We have seen people with a similar type of relationship who went to Swami Brahmananda, our 
beloved teacher. Because one of them was transformed by the divine love of Swami Brahmananda, 
the other also went through a real transformation, as we find in the story of Vilwamangal. Similar 
instances can be cited from the lives of Sri Ramakrishna and other great spiritual personalities.  
There are some persons in this world who love each other without caring to get anything from the 
beloved. They love for the sake of love, as Swami Vivekananda tells us. Again, there are devotees 
who love God for the sake of love and for His own sake, without asking for something petty in 
return, even though there are some who ask for God's love and His revelation. Those who have a 
little glimpse of this love are full of joy which knows no bounds.  
The vast majority of the people do not have the highest form of love in the beginning of their lives; 
however, they can cultivate it in the same way that they cultivate friendship and love on the human 
plane of existence. In human relationships people cultivate friendship by exchanging things or 
feelings. However, in most cases, if they do not give to their beloved, this very sentiment and 
joyous state of mind gradually vanish. So, in society, people have the custom of doing something 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
138	  Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna XXV: 587-528 
	  

	  
87	  
for their friends. Take, for instance, the exchange of gifts that occurs during the Christmas or Easter 
seasons. Through this custom, individuals remember one another and express their love and 
sentiment for one another. People also seek the companionship of their friends and relatives for this 
reason. These expressions are necessary to foster and preserve the ties of affection.  
Although it is true that many persons start to express their sentiment in its lowest form, a higher 
type of love can be developed gradually. Friendship has to be nurtured by unselfishness and the 
spirit of giving. The emotion of love will deteriorate when a person is not established in the highest 
form of love or does not cultivate it. We know many cases where selfishness has stood between 
persons and ruined not only their love but also their lives. It is worth while for everyone to detect 
the element of selfishness in his emotional life. Nothing ruins emotional joy more certainly than 
selfishness.  
The person who bases his activities and expressions on egocentricity can never integrate his 
emotions. His only consideration will be for himself and how he reacts to another individual. He 
evaluates everything from that point of view. In a competitive society, which exists in the modern 
world, people have this egocentric, selfish attitude. The result is emotional starvation and 
deterioration of friendship and matrimonial relationship. Even the parent-child relationship becomes 
disappointing because of the egocentric attitude on the part of parents and children. 
 Family life, which should be based on love, is ruined in a competitive society because of the 
invasion of selfishness. We know of one woman of high social status and economic security who 
came to us for advice. Her husband happened to be selfish in his reactions to any problems. Because 
of his egocentric attitude he wanted to get rid of his wife, in spite of twenty-five or more years of 
association. As he grew older, his egocentricity became more and more evident. It affected his 
relationship with his grown-up children, which resulted in an all-round disturbance in the whole 
family. He was trying to find the reason for his difficulties in the little traits of his wife rather than 
in his egocentric attitude toward life. Our advice to the lady was to cultivate a great deal of patience 
and endurance and to rectify some of her traits which apparently had become causes of disturbance 
in the husband. She was also asked to go through regular spiritual exercises to integrate herself. Her 
husband was requested to understand the proper value of married life on the basis of cooperation 
and coordination. As time has passed, they have been considerably reconciled.  
Another situation which has come to our attention is that of a young couple very much disturbed 
because of the selfishness of the husband in the intimate marital relationship. This is about to 
destroy their marriage. We have advised the husband to consider the requirements, aspirations, and 
desires of his wife. Personal interviews and instructions to both the man and the woman have 
helped in removing this barrier to their happiness and emotional satisfaction.  
Selfishness is manifested in other forms in family life. Some time ago, a mature man in one of the 
large cities of the East became very interested in religion. His wife missed his attention and 
consequently became disturbed. Our advice to both of them was to give consideration to each 
other's welfare. It was not the religious attitude that disturbed the relationship but it was rather 
egocentricity and selfishness which caused the trouble. If husband and wife respect each other as 
spiritual beings their worldly relationships will take care of themselves.  
On the other hand, a few years ago we met a lady who was deeply interested in religion. At first her 
husband showed sympathy and interest in her religious activities. However, when their intimate 
relationship was affected and his selfish expressions were curbed, his appreciation of religion 
wholly vanished. Our advice to both was to cultivate a real spirit of unselfish love.  
In another situation a problem in relationship arose between a mother and daughter. The daughter 
became deeply interested in religious life and practices, which changed her total personality and 
way of life. Observing this radical change, the mother  also began to show interest in religion. 

	  
88	  
Previous to this time her religious life had been practically nil. As the daughter progressed more and 
more, devoting considerable time to her spiritual exercises, studies, and consecrated work, and as 
she improved in her own personal work and duties, the mother gradually became disturbed. She did 
not like to see the radical transformation in her daughter. She probably felt inferior. The element of 
jealousy became extremely operative and seriously disturbed the relationship between them. Our 
advice was to both of them, just as it was to the husband and wife, that they should cultivate the 
spirit of unselfish love. The daughter should be allowed to develop in religious life in her own way; 
and the mother should also grow spiritually in her own way.  
It is evident that when the emotions of love and affection are stirred without proper cultivation and 
expression, human nature deteriorates. Love is the integral part of the human mind; in fact, it is the 
most powerful drive in human nature. If individuals let it starve, they invariably pay bitterly.  
Swami Vivekananda used to say: "Expansion is life; contraction is death” The smaller a person 
makes his circle of loving friends, the more interested he becomes in himself and the smaller he 
becomes. He gradually becomes emotionally emaciated which results in neurosis and often 
psychosis. When a person withdraws himself from social contact, which furnishes the background 
for the cultivation of the emotions, he becomes increasingly egocentric and selfish. He always 
considers his own little problems as the most important factors of life; and his mind may actually 
become pathological, even though he may hold a good position in business or in a profession. The 
power of love in its expression lifts man to a joyous state. On the other hand, its withdrawal makes 
one miserable and abnormal. So a person should always try to expand himself in the cultivation of 
love for normal life and behavior. He should deliberately cultivate higher emotions for friends and 
relatives through the exchange of loving expressions, based on the experience of divine love.  
Cynicism is an unhealthy state of mind and a great barrier to proper emotional expression. It is 
often argued that people should have a critical attitude in life and objectivity in understanding 
human nature. When they continue to be critical in the name of objectivity they become cynical and 
pessimistic. These attitudes are great obstacles to the manifestation of the power of love. A man 
who has these unfortunate traits of mind invariably loses his friends.  
On the other hand, the man who has the opposite qualities attracts people to him as the magnet 
attracts iron. The great spiritual teachers who revolutionized society, civilization, and culture could 
do so because of their unselfish love for humanity. St. Francis of Assisi even made friends with 
animals because of his unselfish love. The same was true of Swami Vivekananda; his heart knew no 
bounds. Consequently, animals were attracted to him, not to speak of human beings. This type of 
love need not necessarily be limited to such personalities. We find this power of emotional 
expression in ordinary human beings. We know of a young man who, from his boyhood, was 
optimistic, sweet, and friendly to everyone. His genial temperament attracted men and women to 
him in great numbers. He expanded his life immensely, and his circle of friends increased so much 
that it is difficult for him to find time to satisfy the emotional cravings of his friends who are 
constantly seeking his loving expressions.  
If anyone wants to have the joy of love, he has to cultivate it deliberately. Would to God we all had 
that intense, all consuming love! Unfortunately, most people do hot have it at present. Some young 
friends in Providence were surprised when we said in a lecture that most persons do not have love 
for God. When we discussed it together later they realized that actually they did not love Him. 
People have a kind of feeling or a kind of admiration for God or a fear of Him which may be 
mistaken for love. However, love can be cultivated if people think of Him and serve Him as if they 
loved Him.  
In ordinary life, one person first sees another and then loves him. There is an exchange of feeling 
which intensifies the devotion. The intense love of a mother appears the moment she sees her baby. 
Similarly, in all other human relationships love occurs between persons who see each other. 

	  
89	  
However, divine love has to be cultivated without seeing God for the time being. We seldom meet a 
person who can say: "Yes, I see God." We seldom find a person who can truthfully say that he 
experiences God.  
The question arises: What can an individual do to love God?  
In the beginning, he assumes that he loves Him. This is what Swami Vivekananda calls the 
preparatory stage.139 At first he feels only an attraction for God and then he cultivates love by doing 
something for Him. Herein lies the utility of devotional exercises, known also as spiritual practices 
or worship. These practices include concentration and meditation, repeating the name of God, and 
other such means of reminding one's self of Him. Worship in any form is nothing but a method of 
cultivating divine love. Through it the devotee thinks of Him and the thought brings out his 
emotions for Him. Divine love is in everyone; the Blissful One, that Rasa, that Supreme Being, is 
present in all. Consequently, our true nature is love, is bliss. There is no one in this world who has 
no possibility of love. Yet, in a mysterious, inexplicable way people cover their true nature, their 
love, and then they become selfish and egocentric.  
As a person proceeds in the preparatory stage of devotion, he begins to feel joy. As we have 
mentioned, Swami Brahmananda used to tell us that next to the joy of the realization of God is the 
joy that one has in spiritual practices.140 When the mind becomes free from the struggle of 
discipline, then the individual begins to enjoy his spiritual exercises.  
A religious leader and his followers used to visit Sri Ramakrishna at Dakshineswar. Sri 
Ramakrishna also visited their group. In some of their prayers they expressed the idea: "With our 
devotion we make God enjoyable." Sri Ramakrishna said: "What are you talking about! You make 
God enjoyable I You give Him that! Your devotion does not make God blissful or joyous. He is Joy 
and Bliss Itself. Through your devotion and love you make yourselves fit to know how joyous He 
is. You do not give the quality of love to Him; He is Love Itself." The person who has a little 
glimpse of that Reality knows what He really is. He discovers God.  
The vast majority of the people are afraid of God. In certain traditions, the followers are told that 
they must fear Him. It is true that beginners have fear, wonder, and admiration, as Sri Ramakrishna 
used to say. A child is afraid of an unknown person, but this does not mean that the unknown 
person is someone to be feared. Sometimes, when a person is not known by others, they have 
misconceived ideas about him. Similarly, when a person does not know God, the human 
weaknesses of fear, wonder, reverence, and admiration are attributed to Him. Admiration and 
reverence are noble in certain respects, but they do not indicate the highest form of divine love in 
the personal relationship with God. The highest form of all-consuming divine love goes beyond 
these characteristics of reverence, wonder, and admiration. In human relationships one person 
cannot love another if he is afraid of Him. Neither can an individual love another if he admires his 
glory, success, or greatness. This attitude creates separation, distance between them. Religion may 
begin with admiration of God, with an appreciation of His vast, infinite nature and glory; but 
spiritual life goes beyond this. Fear, wonder, and admiration all vanish from the heart of a lover. We 
do not thereby mean that the lover does not admire, revere, and appreciate the love of the beloved; 
he only remains oblivious of these feelings because of his own love for his beloved. Love is sweet. 
There must be sweetness in the relationship; and this cannot be enjoyed as long as there is 
separation. As a person approaches God, the distance vanishes and He becomes the nearest and 
dearest and the sweetest of all. That is the reason that there is enjoyment in divine love. There is no 
pain in it. At a certain stage of spiritual life there may be a feeling of pain in the separation from 
God, but that pain is more than compensated by the realization of the Beloved.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
139	  Bhakti Yoga," Works, III, 70-80. E	  
140	  Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 100. 	  

	  
90	  
As a person proceeds in his enjoyment of love, there is a feeling of intimacy with God, a sense that 
"I am my Lord's and He is mine." One of our great Swamis used to say that the moment a spiritual 
aspirant or devotee feels that God belongs to him and he belongs to God, at that moment spiritual 
practices are no longer needed. Although he continues with them for their enjoyment, he has 
reached what he wanted an intimacy of union. This intimacy comes as one grows through 
devotional exercises or as this inherent love begins to manifest itself. Does not a mother feel 
intimacy with her child? Does not a lover feel intimacy with his beloved? This feeling of belonging, 
of union, is the culmination of love. At that time we find that Beloved and lover lose all sense of 
separation. The joy of love becomes so intoxicating that a lover can hardly remain separated from 
the Beloved. Ultimately, they are united. As the devotees of Brindaban, in the Hindu tradition of 
India, used to say: "I am He; I am He!"141 
 Different periods in the life of Sri Chaitanya and Sri Ramakrishna explicitly justify this statement 
of the devotees of Brindaban. We have seen that the great disciples of Sri Ramakrishna indicated 
that they realized this unity even though some of them started with the path of love, keeping 
themselves separate from the Beloved. Swami Shivananda, a great disciple of Sri Ramakrishna and 
a mystic of the highest type, was primarily a devotee and lover of God of the third type, even 
though he often expressed the idea that he was one with God. In one of his inspiring letters to an 
American devotee he wrote: "I and the spirit are one. I know it and you will also be able to know 
it." The person who has a little glimpse of that joy of love is blessed and he makes others blessed by 
his very presence. He becomes a center of love and radiates that joy everywhere.  
 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
141	  Bhagavatam, chap. XI.  
	  

	  
91	  
CHAPTER 12 
Love, Marriage, and Religion 
HE nature of the human mind and its inherent urges, tendencies, and emotions has already 
been discussed in previous chapters. The emotion of love is inherent in man; nay, it is the 
nature of the human soul. There is no one in the world who does not have the urge of love, 
no matter how imperfect he may seem to be. It is love that causes one person to sacrifice 
everything, even his life, for the good and happiness of his beloved. It is love that motivates man to 
reconstruct himself, establish a family, raise a culture, and build up a civilization. Again, it is ill-
directed love that destroys human beings, society, and their culture, as we observe in contemporary 
history. This noble emotion of man can disintegrate a personality and interpersonal relationships 
when the emotions are uncontrolled, frustrated, and conflicting, as previous chapters have indicated. 
It is not the fault of love itself, but its misuse and abuse that creates so much trouble and 
disturbance. Love can be used for good or bad purposes when it is well-directed or ill-directed. 
However, the true nature of love is indeed constructive, harmonious, and unifying. It is the basic 
quality of the human soul; it is the urge which unifies one person with others. It is the connecting 
link between the lover and beloved. It culminates in the union of the two.  
Therefore, it is worth while for us to consider the nature of love and its use. As we stated in Chapter 
11, there are three forms of love manifest in human life, namely, demanding love, bartering love, 
and giving, un-mercenary love. The first two forms do not fulfill the nature of real love; 
consequently, they are unsatisfactory and create disturbance, frustration, and disappointment.  
Often they destroy the noble relationships of many human beings. On the other hand, the third form 
of love is a blessing in human life. If an individual is a real lover of the third type, it does not occur 
to him that he is sacrificing anything for the beloved; there is no calculation involved. This kind of 
love is as natural as breathing. It satisfies the inner nature of man, because his soul is what the 
Hindus call ananda, bliss. Since the human soul is inseparably related to God, its very nature is 
bliss. There is a statement in one of the Upanishads: "He is the bliss itself."  
Any kind of emotion that limits or binds the true nature of the soul makes it unhappy and restless. 
In our everyday experiences we find that man is constantly restless because he is seeking the 
fulfillment of bliss within him. He is trying to find his real nature and to culminate h. the glory of 
love by expanding his inner self. The moment there is tension, conflict, or frustration or lack of a 
healthy manifestation of this noble emotion, that very moment serious difficulty is created in the 
mind. Emotional disturbances also create serious functional ailments. When love, the basic quality 
of the human soul, does not have proper expression and does not fulfill its purpose — union with 
others — it creates a baneful effect in the emotional nature of man. Misbehavior and delinquency of 
children and youth, for instance, can be traced to lack of love on the part of the parents, other 
relatives, and society. Innumerable cases of behavior disturbances stem from this source.  
Love makes one expand. Anything that contracts our inner nature and makes us withdraw from the 
process of spontaneous emotional evolution creates serious disturbances in life. We often observe 
that any man who does not have this process of expansion gradually withdraws to himself and 
becomes more and more selfish and self-centered. In course of time he is bound to be dissatisfied 
and unhappy. This progressive contraction of love creates difficulties in interpersonal relationships. 
Then man goes through a vicious circle. As he withdraws to himself and thinks of his own personal 
interests and thereby intensifies his egocentricity, he becomes unpopular, anti-social, and then he 
withdraws more and more. Indeed, this goes against the very basic nature of man. This is what the 
great Swami calls death. Jesus also gave the same idea when He said: "He that saveth his life shall 
lose it." 
T 

	  
92	  
From our infancy we express and receive love. From our birth we would not exist if the mother did 
not love us. We would die but for the love and care of the mother. All of us remember our younger 
days when our mother nourished us with her love and protection. She did not calculate that her 
child would or would not give her anything. She gave spontaneously and never thought that she was 
sacrificing anything. It was her life to give. As we grow up the emotion of love expands to include 
brothers and sisters. Later, we express love to neighbors, playmates, friends, and others. Then we 
have an urge to fulfill this love and we gradually try to intensify it and focus it. We seek an intimate 
companion with whom we can share our ideas and ideals and with whom we can work for common 
happiness and common good. We think that by loving an individual intensely and completely and 
having him as the partner of our journey through human life we shall have happiness and 
satisfaction. This is what is commonly known as falling in love. It is needless to say that most 
people do not really understand the full implication of falling in love; but it is indeed a great event 
in the life of a young person. He thinks that when two people are united in love there is great joy 
and satisfaction in life. Herein lies the value of marriage.  
The question arises here: Can a person have the satisfaction of love without marrying? Is marriage 
essential for the culmination of love? Some thinkers maintain that it is essential. They feel that 
people cannot have intense love without it. We are not referring to physical extra-marital 
relationships but we are concerned about the life of monks and nuns and others who are devoted to 
the love of God. A book by our friend, Professor Peter A. Bertocci, expresses the idea that without 
marriage one cannot have the fulfillment of love.142 We are sure he did not consider the lives of 
spiritual persons, such as the monks and nuns and some of the great creative artists and thinkers, but 
thought only in terms of the extra-marital physical relationships between man and woman. We 
agree with him that extra-marital physical relationship is a barrier for the culmination of real love. 
However, it is worth while for us to give attention to the fact that a man can reach the culmination 
of love without marriage, if he directs this greatest urge of the human mind to God, directly and 
immediately, without any physical expression. A monk or nun deliberately and consciously directs 
his or her love to God and finds fulfillment in union with Him. The devotee forgets himself and 
merges himself in God. As Girish Ghosh, the great dramatist of India, writes: "I lost myself in 
Him." So the monk or nun loses himself or herself in the love of God and finds intense emotional 
satisfaction in it. This form of love cannot be compared to anything on the human plane. It is all-
consuming, universal, illimitable. It exp ands a person in such a way that he feels kinship not only 
with God but also with other beings. That is the reason a St. Francis and a Swami Vivekananda 
could love all beings intensely. They found that all beings were united and inseparably connected 
with their Beloved. Indeed, this is the culmination of the third form of love. It is the greatest 
satisfaction that any human being can have. It is the goal of householders as well as of those in 
monasteries and convents.  
Marriage is essential for most people, as it is in itself a training process in human emotions. 
Marriage is important for the cultivation of human love and for the harmonious development of 
other emotions, but it is a mistake to say that a man cannot love God without going through 
marriage. Monks and nuns, however, are few in this world; they form a microscopic minority. So 
the vast majority of the people must experience love through the medium of marriage.  
Marriage is a sacrament, to use Christian terminology, which enables two persons to discipline their 
emotions together and to harmonize the differences in their emotions, understanding, aspirations, 
and achievements in life. It enables them not only to have emotional satisfaction but also to 
sacrifice their likes and dislikes for the common good and for the good of their children. The 
experience of marriage is an important process in the expansion of the emotions as well as of love 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
142	  Peter A. Bertocci, The Human Adventure in Sex, Love, and Marriage (New York: Association Press, 1949).  
	  

	  
93	  
and of social consciousness. It has been found that a civilization deteriorates when it loses the 
sanctity of married life. Professor J. D. Unwin, of Oxford and Cambridge, comes to the conclusion 
in Sex and Culture that when the people of a civilization indulge in sexual promiscuity, 
disregarding the sanctity of marriage, invariably there is deterioration.143 Our own observations 
convince us of the validity of Professor Unwin's statements. Marriage is a disciplinary process 
which is necessary for the stability of emotions in the vast majority of the people. There are a few 
persons who can find satisfaction in human love without marriage and without extra-marital 
physical relationships. Their love is also intense and at the same time platonic. But every form of 
human love must be related to love of God if it is to be truly satisfactory.  
When the ideal of marriage is considered, we find that it is an important factor in human life, not 
only for social reasons but also for emotional satisfaction. When two persons are intensely in love 
with one another, they want to be wholly united physically, intellectually, emotionally, and above 
all spiritually because the urge of love is essentially a spiritual quality. If we withdraw the spiritual 
element from marriage, it is not going to be successful from the standpoint of the ideal which is the 
basis of marriage. As the goal of human life is the attainment of divinity that is already in man, or 
the attainment of God consciousness, marriage helps the vast majority of people to work toward 
that goal through the fulfillment of the duties and functions of married life. This sacred institution 
leads one gradually from the human to the divine plane. But if any institution, method, or way of 
life deprives us of the primary objective of life, then our progress will be hindered. If the institution 
is withdrawn from society, as it has happened in different cultures, then society is bound to 
disintegrate.  
Many young persons do not actually realize the seriousness of this sacred institution. The result of 
this has been disastrous. If anyone considers that marriage is a purely physical relationship and 
disregards the ideal behind it, then he is bound to fail in the attainment of the real goal of marriage. 
A minister reported to us some time ago how lightly many young people take this institution. He 
said that a young man went to him with a girl he wanted to marry. The expression that the young 
man used was extremely shocking. "I want to be hitched to this skirt."  
A prominent Episcopal minister recently told his congregation, at the thirtieth anniversary of his 
ministry, that at the time he was ordained almost every thirtieth marriage was unsuccessful. Now, 
after thirty years, every third marriage is a failure. We can cite instances from our own experience. 
A young man recently discussed his marriage problem with us. After he had been married about a 
month he and his wife were divorced. After a few months they got together again and remarried. 
After living together for a few more months they separated. When the young man asked for advice 
we told him that this experiment in marriage was hasty. Two grownups from different backgrounds 
cannot know each other sufficiently in one month to determine if they can adjust to each other. In 
fact, it was our conviction that they did not have a sound understanding of the marriage vow. The 
marriage was based on physical fascination. Our advice was that in the first place they should 
understand the significance of marriage and give themselves sufficient time to find out if they were 
compatible or not.  
It is worth while to consider the Hindu conception of marriage. The implication in the term used to 
denote a Hindu wife is self-evident. She is called saha-dharmini, the partner in spiritual culture. 
Marriage is considered as a union of two persons for mutual understanding, emotional satisfaction, 
and fulfillment of the common ideal of life. The Judaeo-Christian tradition has a similar conception 
of the sacredness of marriage. The man and wife are co-workers in the unfoldment of spiritual life. 
The goal of life, whether for man or woman, as we have expressed many times, is the unfoldment of 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
143	  J. D. Unwin, Sex and Culture (London: Humphrey Milford, 1934).  
	  

	  
94	  
the spirit within us, either through the marriage of two individuals who love one another and 
dedicate themselves to their mutual happiness, understanding, and spiritual development, or through 
monasticism. The goal of life is the ultimate manifestation of the divinity that is already in man, as 
we have quoted from Swami Vivekananda. We are consciously or unconsciously, deliberately or 
unintentionally, directly or indirectly, approaching the goal, because our inner urge is compelling us 
to reach that final aim — the realization of God. In married life two persons who love each other 
intensely are fulfilling some purpose. Man functions on the physical, intellectual, moral, and 
spiritual planes. The majority of people can not function on the spiritual plane all at once. They 
have to go through the different phases of life and harmonize them. It is a mistake to say that 
marriage is meant for physical satisfaction alone. There are many persons who understand marriage 
primarily in terms of physical gratification. A number of books have been written to justify this 
conception. The Kinsey report144 is one of the outstanding presentations of this conception of the 
human functions. It is true that a group of investigators has certain facts, but the implicit 
generalizations are not justifiable.  
We grant that the physical element exists in married life, but even this is not satisfactory unless 
there is intense love between man and wife. Many persons do not realize the cause of marital 
disturbances. One of the important causes is the lack of understanding of two distinct natures — 
masculine and feminine. It is true that people crave love, yet the feminine nature is more inherently 
emotional. It will not be out of place to say that much of the intellectual understanding of women is 
based on their emotional reactions and interpretation. It is commonly understood that women have 
"hunches," or an intuitive sense of certain things. This method of knowledge is of the emotional 
type in the majority of women. Most men do not actually understand feminine requirements so they 
create certain physical situations which become the basis for feminine tension, disturbance, and 
dissatisfaction on the physical plane, as their physical satisfaction is closely tied up with their 
emotional life. It is needless to say that many marital disturbances can be eliminated if both parties 
understand the mutual requirements. However, both are often selfish and thoughtless and do not 
consider each other's emotional needs.  
We can cite many instances of failure in this sacred union due to the carelessness and 
thoughtlessness of the husband. A lady married a great intellectual who already had a previous 
failure in marriage. Even in his first marriage he did not fully realize the feminine requirements, so 
he was not at all thoughtful of the emotional element in the physical satisfaction of his second wife. 
In various ways he would hurt the emotions of this partner. Gradually this carelessness, 
thoughtlessness, and selfishness on his part completely alienated the affection of his wife.  
They both gradually developed a mental attitude which necessitated a divorce. Fortunately, the lady 
understood the higher values of life and directed her mind considerably to the ultimate goal of life, 
even though she went through this agonizing experience. On the other hand, we know another 
couple who had a similar type of problem and, after about twenty years, that marriage, also, ended 
in divorce. Unfortunately, the lady would not absorb the higher spiritual values, so she is living a 
life of complete isolation and frustration.  
Married couples should keep in mind that their success in life will depend on mutual understanding, 
love, and cooperation, even on the physical plane. Many persons do not realize the value of 
cooperation and harmony in their intimate life. It is worth while for both the partners to keep this 
idea of cooperation bright in their minds through the medium of their marriage, if they want to 
reach the goal.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
144	  Alfred C. Kinsey, Mardell B. Pomeroy, and Clyde E. Martin, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male (Philadelphia: W. 
B. Saunders Co., 1948).  
	  

	  
95	  
An important element in marriage is procreation. Marriage is not generally satisfactory if it is not 
blessed with children. Often, people do not realize this particular feminine requirement. After all, 
woman is the mother, as Swami Vivekananda points out in his "Women of India." Women 
consciously or unconsciously are seeking motherhood. The mother sentiment is present even in 
four- or five-year old girls, not to speak of adults. We find that if a woman is not married or if she is 
without a child after marriage she spontaneously expresses the mother instinct and wants to fulfill it 
in other ways.  
Motherhood is also the spiritual quality of womanhood. Some may question this and say that it is a 
mere biological urge to preserve the race. However, we find that it also has a spiritual and cultural 
value. Culture is transmitted from parents to children, from teachers to students and disciples. It will 
not be out of place to say that this relationship between parents and children can be equated with 
that of the spiritual teachers and disciples in India. The parents consciously and unconsciously 
connect themselves with previous and successive generations and become the links through which 
the culture is passed on to their children. So the parents play an essential part in the structure of 
society. An important emotional element in the propagation of children is the satisfaction of seeing 
them grow into manhood and womanhood and become links themselves through which the cultural 
heritage is passed on. Apart from this value, there is also the deeper spiritual element to be 
considered, for through this process the married couple is gradually approaching the supreme goal 
of life.  
In the Hindu social system there are four stages of life called ashramas.  
(1) A young man or woman enters life as a student. He not only learns from books and gains an 
intellectual conception of philosophy, history, and other such subjects, but he is also trained 
emotionally and practically in interpersonal relationships. He must understand the duties that are 
prescribed for the life of a householder. First is his duty to God. It is the primary duty of every 
person to love or know God. The second duty is to follow the teachings of the great religious 
leaders, the spiritual teachers, who build up cultures and civilizations. What would have been the 
condition of Europe but for the influence of Jesus and His followers? What would have happened in 
India but for the influence of great spiritual personalities like Krishna, Buddha, and others? What 
would have become of the Jews if they had not had the great prophets? What would have become of 
China but for the influence of Lao-tse, Confucius, and others? A person must be grateful to these 
spiritual personalities for his cultural heritage. He fulfills his duty to them by living according to 
their principles and by transmitting the ideals received from them to his children and others, thereby 
preserving the highest values of a culture.  
The third duty is to the parents and grandparents. But for them an individual would not exist nor 
would he have intellectual, emotional, and spiritual achievements. This responsibility is fulfilled in 
the performance of the first duty. The fourth duty of a man is to his fellow beings. His life and 
welfare depend on them. Heat, light, food, shelter, and other comforts and necessities are produced 
by the labor of innumerable persons. Therefore, if a person does nothing in return and only takes 
everything from them, he is neglecting his social duty. Indeed, every man must have social 
consciousness. The fifth and final duty is to inferior beings such as animals, birds, and so forth, for 
they also are potentially divine. By virtue of his birth, a person is obligated to fulfill these duties 
during all the stages of his life.  
(2) When this training period is over, the individual enters married life. Then the married couple 
observes the five duties and serves society. The man and wife take care of the parents, each other, 
their children, relatives, and other members of society.  
(3) When they are older and have brought up their families, they enter the third stage of life which 
is predominantly contemplative. This is a period of preparation for a still higher stage. The husband 

	  
96	  
and wife remain together but they retire from the family life and give their time to intense spiritual 
practices, acting in the capacity of advisors and friends to their children and grandchildren.  
(4) In the last stage of life the individuals give their entire time to the service of God and man 
through intense spiritual practices. This is generally associated with a life of renunciation.  
A proper understanding of these stages is important in marriage. How much middle-aged men and 
women suffer from the wrong understanding of their function in married life! They seem to think 
that they must continue to function on the physical plane throughout life. The result is inevitable 
frustration, tension, and conflict. The body and mind change with age. If anyone wants to continue 
to function on the physical plane even in later years he is bound to have serious difficulties, for 
cruel nature plays havoc with him. Man exists not only for biological satisfaction but for something 
higher. He can have satisfaction throughout life if he also functions on the intellectual, aesthetic, 
moral, and spiritual planes. Marriage is bound to fail if couples do not realize the real values of life 
and marriage. Herein lies the utility of the higher aspect of religion.  
Although we have discussed religion in previous chapters, we are going to elaborate its meaning for 
married life. If a person keeps the supreme goal bright in life and subordinates all the other 
functions to that ideal, then there is definite justification and reason to be happy in marriage. On the 
other hand, if he discards the religious value in marriage and takes it merely as the fulfillment of 
physical satisfaction, there will be inevitable frustration. For example, there was an important 
professional man with a great deal of inherited wealth who was married for more than twenty-five 
years. He and his wife had normal children. As he approached the age of sixty, he began to realize 
that his physical appetite was not being satisfied and he started to seek new channels of satisfaction. 
He tried to justify himself by criticizing his wife, but the criticism was on weak grounds. The real 
basis of the matrimonial trouble was a lack of higher aspirations and the practice of higher values. 
The life of the couple became unbearable. The wife sought spiritual assistance and helped herself 
considerably. The husband continued to be disturbed for some time, but due to the nobility of his 
wife he began gradually to submit to the inevitable conditions of life. However, the agony of the 
man cannot be fully described. He would have eliminated this disturbance entirely and led a sweet 
life with his wife if he could have persuaded himself to devote time to intellectual and spiritual 
values. Many persons, both men and women, are dissatisfied with life and act violently because of 
frustration} and the inner tension caused by wrong and immature insight into values. Even though 
they are grownup they function like children, clinging to the old objects of enjoyment. If they could 
have mature insight that their physical nature is bound to change and, therefore, give emphasis to 
higher values, they would have a peaceful and happy middle age and old age.  
Even intellectual and aesthetic pursuits cannot satisfy a person fully all through life. They are, no 
doubt, better than mere physical functioning, but we know some people of middle age who give 
their time to intellectual and aesthetic culture which does not sustain them. There is no emotional 
satisfaction unless a person has God in his life. There is no need to be ashamed of the word God. He 
may be called God, Allah, Jehovah, Absolute, or whatever a person prefers; but whatever He may 
be called, a person must have that Reality in his life. The reason is that two persons coming from 
different backgrounds, traditions, and families will find it difficult to harmonize and integrate 
themselves into the marital union unless they understand that there is a higher reality in both of 
them. They should gradually reach the third point, God, who is the central figure of both. If two 
persons realize that they are inseparably connected with each other because of their relationship to 
God, this becomes the common basis for their union. Expediency does not help for any length of 
time. They may think that they must work together because otherwise their married life will not be 
happy, but they need a still higher value to have deeper understanding, sympathy, and acceptance of 
one another's tendencies, possibilities, achievements, and emotional and intellectual requirements. 
As we think of married life, we cannot help but conclude that the basis of all the requirements of 

	  
97	  
marriage lies in the understanding of the partner's higher nature. The question may arise: Why 
should not an individual seek personal gratification, even at the cost of the partner? But when the 
man and wife understand that they are interrelated with God, just as the rays of the sun are related 
to one another and to the sun, they will harmonize and give up their angularities for the common 
good, for mutual happiness, and Tor God-realization. They can thereby reach the third form of love.  
Another factor should be remembered in order to make marriage successful. Although men and 
women are inseparably connected with God, on the physical plane they function differently as 
individuals. Men have certain types of expressions and functions and women another. By no means 
is one sex inferior to the other. On the contrary, they are complementary. The masculine and 
feminine functions in life complete the totality of human experience. If one or the other feels self-
sufficiency and disregards or subordinates the importance of the other, then there will be incomplete 
functioning of human life creating serious consequences. Many major problems arise in married life 
when either party fails to realize the significance of the respective duties and functions of the other. 
Due to the lack of understanding of proper values and each other's complementary nature, certain 
mental disturbances can be created in the form of superiority or inferiority complexes, apart from 
the disharmony caused in total married life.  
Clinical psychologists often face this problem. A particular case comes to mind in this connection. 
A man lost his father early in life and was brought up by his mother without any masculine 
influence. He naturally began to imitate the feminine nature. When he was married to a young 
woman, his feminine tendencies created a serious conflict both in him and in his wife which 
ultimately destroyed this sacred relationship. We also know many instances where the woman has 
become extremely aggressive and  masculine in her marital affairs. This trait may have developed 
because of her admiration of her father or because of childhood negligence and insecurity resulting 
in a feeling of inferiority. When a woman adopts the masculine way of life, she invariably neglects 
her proper functioning and duty in marriage. This imitation of the masculine quality by a feminine 
nature is disastrous and creates conflicts in both partners.  
We know many women in the present social structure who like to imitate men in their personal 
behavior and relationships. They do not seem to realize that their role in family life is as important 
as that of the men. We cannot blame women for that, as in a patriarchal society man plays an 
important part. The importance of the woman's place is ignored, so much so that she is made to feel 
inferior. On the other hand, in a matriarchal society, woman plays the most important part, keeping 
the man in a subordinate state. In both these distinct types of society, one or the other suffers from a 
sense of inferiority, thus creating serious disturbances in both partners, directly or indirectly. 
However, in a stable society, they are both equally important, even though there is a difference in 
their respective functions and duties.  
A man should realize that his wife is basically divine, just as the wife should realize that her 
husband is also basically divine. In one of the Upanishads there is a celebrated story which is told in 
the conversation between two spiritual personalities, a man and wife renouncing the world. The 
wife wanted to share the treasure for which her husband was giving up the world. In the inspired 
conversation the husband, Yajnavalkya, tells the wife:– 
 "Oh, Maitreyi, the husband is not dear to the wife because of the husband but because of the love 
for the Atma (Self) in the husband. Similarly, the wife is not dear to the husband because of 
herself but because of the husband's love for the Atma in her. ... So, Maitreyi, realize the Atma 
who is the dearest of all."145  
When a person realizes the fact of the spiritual nature of man, he becomes convinced that the 
masculine and feminine functions are equally important; neither is inferior or superior to the other.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
145	  Brihad-aranyakopanishad II: 4. 	  

	  
98	  
That is the reason that in ancient India there was harmony in the family. The society was neither 
totally patriarchal nor totally matriarchal. It was based on mutual understanding and appreciation of 
the two aspects of human nature. In order to make marriage successful, a person must understand 
that these two functions are necessary for the common good and for the realization of the ultimate 
goal of life.  
Another problem to consider is the implication of marriage in a society or a culture. From the Hindu 
point of view, marriage is not a mere personal affair; it is a social affair as well. Hindu marriage is 
greatly communistic, not in the Russian sense but in a spiritual sense. Two persons marry, live 
together, and function together on the physical, moral, intellectual, and spiritual planes for their 
own happiness and for the good of society at large. That is the reason that in India a marriage is 
approved by society; the newly-weds are accepted as integral parts of the group. Naturally, society 
should have some voice in the marital union to determine that it is not only good for the pleasure of 
the young people but also for the whole social structure. Nowadays, young people all over the 
world are often individualistic and disregard their social responsibility. This individualistic and 
selfish attitude toward marriage, with disregard of its social implications, often seriously affects the 
union. It gradually makes the partners more and more egocentric and selfish. On the other hand, if 
the newly wed couples realize their social responsibility they will contribute to society, because 
they understand that society contributes a great deal to their welfare. Naturally, society should give 
its sanction and blessings to the young married couple. That can only happen when the religious 
ideal is kept bright. When such marriages take place, it can be taken for granted that they will be a 
blessing to the family, to society, to the community, and to the world, for true religion cultivates 
mutual thoughtfulness.  
In order to remedy tension and frustration in marriage, the couple should have a thorough 
understanding of the required ethical discipline; otherwise, the marriage will be an inevitable 
failure, even though there may not be divorce. Apart from mutual physical satisfaction, there must 
be other satisfactions if the marriage is to contribute healthy and normal children to society and 
fulfill its social values. In our own experience and that of many clinical psychologists, social 
welfare workers, and ministers of religion, it has been found that insecurity in children produces 
abnormalities and thereby creates a chaotic condition in society. In order to stabilize and harmonize 
the sacred union, both parties have to realize that they must impose discipline on themselves. This 
is not imposed on them by outsiders but is self-imposed self-control for the good and happiness of 
the man and wife as well as the children.  
It is sometimes suggested that external ethical super-imposition creates serious disturbances and 
maladjustment in the union. Outside influences often create difficulties. But if the couple use self-
control instead of self-expression in case of conflict, bringing in their own religious values, their 
marriage will grow in mutual happiness and harmony and the gradual spiritual evolution of both 
husband and wife.  
It is, no doubt, easy to understand the utility of ethical living but it is difficult to carry out, for any 
two individuals have distinct tendencies and emotional reactions. They also have individual likes 
and dislikes, and consequently, there are a great many chances for irritations and conflicts. Herein 
lies the real value of spiritual practices which bring out the inner power to carry out the ethical 
principles of endurance, forgiveness, tolerance, acceptance, and sympathy in the couple's personal 
problems and in their social situations. Besides, the ethical living enables them to evolve spiritually 
and to set noble examples to their children by harmonizing their own relationship.  
Counselors, advisors, social workers, and psychotherapists who are interested in helping people to 
establish stability and happiness in marriage by the removal of mental conflict, tension, and 
frustration must clearly recognize that their work will be meaningless, even though they give 
temporary help, unless they thoroughly emphasize the ethical basis of marriage and make clear that 

	  
99	  
it means self-imposed self-control rather than repression. When a mother gives up luxuries for the 
good of the children, she does it willingly and lovingly without being conscious of sacrifice. 
Similarly, a married couple should often be willing to give up their selfish desires and expressions 
and personal satisfactions for the good of each other and the children and for their own spiritual 
growth.  
The married couple should not only work together in their household duties and personal functions 
but should also devote time to their spiritual practices together. It is an important factor for their 
mutual growth. When one or the other neglects spiritual practices while the other partner goes on 
evolving spiritually there is conflict and tension. The one who neglects the spiritual duties becomes 
dissatisfied. Often he or she becomes jealous of the other.  
In one case a man became deeply interested in spiritual life. While his wife appreciated spiritual 
values, she neglected spiritual practices. She gradually began to feel lonely and dissatisfied, as she 
was not taking part in the total experience of her husband, even though they were working together 
in other aspects of family life. This dissatisfaction of the wife created serious conflict in the marital 
relationship. The result was about to be disastrous when a spiritual teacher came to know about the 
situation and tried to straighten it out by persuading the wife to go through similar religious 
discipline. As a consequence, he was able to establish considerable harmony in the life of these two 
persons.  
In another case, the wife was becoming deeply interested in spiritual life and began to do her 
spiritual practices seriously, which produced a radical change in her life. Her husband was 
intellectually appreciative of his wife in the early part of this changed situation. However, as she 
began to make progress while he neglected his spiritual practices, he became considerably 
dissatisfied and jealous of his wife. Unfortunately, his mind went farther and farther away from 
religious life, in spite of his earlier intellectual appreciation and enthusiasm. The situation ended in 
marital disaster and divorce. A spiritual teacher tried in vain to persuade the husband to take up 
religious life. We are convinced that if the husband could have taken up spiritual practices along 
with the wife this unfortunate situation would not have arisen. Moreover, they would have been 
very happy in all the phases of life.  
In many cases when two persons deeply appreciate religious values and practice spiritual exercises 
together they establish real harmony in their union. This togetherness should be practiced in the 
physical, intellectual, aesthetic, and spiritual phases of life. It is important to note that the spirit of 
cooperation is valuable in the lives of the children as well. The children are intuitive and intelligent 
in their evaluation of the life of the parents. Whenever they notice or sense lack of cooperation in 
the parents in any way they feel insecure. Children who are brought up in a family with no 
togetherness or cooperation develop many of the juvenile difficulties and even delinquency. It is 
important that parents discharge their duty to their children by developing the spirit of cooperation 
in all phases of their lives, for the sake of the children, for society at large, and above all for their 
own happiness and the ultimate realization of the common spiritual goal.  
 

	  
100  
CHAPTER 13 
Religion and Integration 
 MAN can be called a real man so long as he is struggling to overcome nature. Many 
people think of nature as that which is governed by physical laws; but nature is internal as 
well as external. Not only is it comprised of the laws that govern the particles of matter in 
the external world and in the human body but it also consists of the more subtle motive powers 
which control the internal world. It is wonderful to conquer external nature but it is still more 
wonderful to conquer internal nature. It is admirable to know the laws that govern the stars and 
planets; it is infinitely more admirable to know the laws that govern the passions, feelings, and will 
of mankind. This conquest of the inner man, the understanding of the subtle mechanisms within the 
human mind, and the knowledge of its remarkable secrets belong strictly and entirely to religion, or 
to the branch of psychology which deals with the total function of the human mind.  
In every society there is a group of people whose pleasure is not in the senses but beyond them, 
who now and then catch glimpses of something higher than gross matter, and who struggle to reach 
it.146 The rise of a nation comes with an increase in the number of such men, and the fall begins 
when this pursuit of the Infinite has ceased. The mainstream of every race lies in its spirituality. The 
death of that race begins when spirituality wavers and materialism and hedonism gain the 
ascendancy.  
Everyone is concerned nowadays with the problems of man. Every individual is frightened about 
the future of civilization, the future of mankind. Fifty years ago, Swami Vivekananda said in his 
Indian lectures:– 
 "The whole of the Western world is on a volcano which may burst tomorrow, go to pieces 
tomorrow. They have searched every corner of the world and have found no respite."147  
Serious and thoughtful men are trying to find a solution for these threatening problems of the 
modern world. It is to be expected that they are frightened by the destructive use of scientific 
knowledge at present. They do not know how or when the other nations will begin to use the 
products of this knowledge. Scientists, philosophers, and religious leaders are making alarming 
statements about current conditions. Professor Northrop, in his interesting and inspiring book, The 
Meeting of East and West, is seeking a solution for the vexing problems of international life.148 He 
also stresses how the East and West can get together and function for mutual good. Of late in his 
speeches he has been emphasizing means of establishing peace between the Anglo-Americans and 
the Russians. It is not necessary to elaborate the importance of these problems in international 
relations. However, we cannot have understanding between Anglo-Americans and Russians or 
between East and West without considering the deeper issues.  
It is absurd to think that politicians and military leaders can handle the situation alone. In the first 
place, they do not understand the basic issues at all. They may say that they do, but their 
understanding is superficial. As Swami Vivekananda says, they are interested in the conquest of 
external nature. When they try to conquer it and use it for the pleasure of man they will create 
various types of problems and tension everywhere until they destroy themselves. Serious men feel 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
146	  William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1911). See also James 
Bissett Pratt, The Religious Consciousness (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1945). Allport, The Individual and His 
Religion. Brightman, Nature and Values.  
147	  "Lectures from Columbo to Almora," Works, III, $77. Sec also Sorokin, The Crisis of Our Age and The 
Reconstruction of Humanity (Boston: Beacon Press, 1948). 	  
148	  F. S. C. Northrop, The Meeting of East and West (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1946).  
	  
A 

	  
101  
that destruction may be very near. Are we, then, to be pessimistic and to think that it is all over? 
Our answer is no. Of course, we have justification to be alarmed, but there is also a solution for this 
frightening problem, if man wants to solve it.  
Apart from national and international problems, there is considerable personal trouble in the world.  
Man's mind is not integrated at present and there is serious mental conflict. Man finds it difficult to 
control and regulate his emotional and other mental urges. Just as he is facing difficulty in national 
and international situations, so he is finding even more vexing problems in his personal life. When 
we stop to think, we find that both external and internal conflicts have the same cause — the 
attempt to conquer external nature. Man has forgotten that he has to overcome his own internal 
nature. Consequently, he has created these vexing problems which threaten to destroy all the values 
of life. Emotional disruptions are frightening the people just as much as political, economic, or 
racial issues.  
Let us consider how we can handle these problems. There are many persons advocating the 
integration of society. The Conference on Science, Philosophy, and Religion and other such groups 
<are discussing this issue. Can scholarship help us to integrate society? Outstanding thinkers and 
scholars recommend education as a solution; they feel that strengthening of the intellect is needed. 
Many of them also feel strongly that the social sciences should be developed. Philosophers like 
Professor John Dewey think that scientific method can alone solve modern problems. According to 
him:–  
It [the present state of philosophy] holds that not grasp of eternal and universal Reality but use of 
the methods and conclusions of our best knowledge, that called scientific, provides the means for 
conducting this search. It holds that limitations which now exist in this use are to be removed by 
means of extension of the ways of tested knowing that define science from physical and 
physiological matters to social and distinctly human affairs. The movement is called, in its 
various aspects, by the names of pragmatism, experimentalism, instrumentalism.149  
The Professor also advises the philosophers to give up the pursuit of the Absolute and direct their 
attention to the development of the various phases of science. He seems to feel that science is still in 
its infancy; when it is thoroughly developed it will solve the problems of man. He writes:– 
 The accusation brought against it [philosophic inquiry] of childlike trust in science omits the fact 
that it holds that science itself is still in its babyhood. ... It holds that it will achieve manhood only 
when its use is extended to cover all aspects of all matters of human concern.150  
Little does he realize that the objective of various scientists is the conquest of the different aspects 
of external nature. Even the social sciences like sociology, social psychology, and anthropology do 
not go deep enough for man to learn how to conquer his inner nature. We cannot help thinking that 
the learned philosopher, along with other such thinkers, misses the mark. His prescriptions seem 
superficial in the light of the facts of contemporary history. As long as the social sciences remain as 
they are in their outlook and philosophy, personal and interpersonal problems will remain unsolved.  
In the conquest of external nature a kind of sociology may be developed from the utilitarian point of 
view. Man is realizing that he cannot live without establishing some sort of integration in society. 
The question arises, then, how can the ideology of the Americans — freedom of speech, freedom of 
religion, freedom of expression, freedom of thought, freedom of private enterprise (based on the 
ideal of democracy) be integrated?  
Again, there is Russia in the process of becoming the greatest or second greatest power. In Russia 
they think that an ordinary man cannot understand what is good for him and has to be trained and 
guided by the leaders who know what is best for his welfare. This totalitarian attitude is the present 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
149	  John Dewey, Problems of Men (New York: Philosophical Library, 1946), p. 11	  
150 Ibid	  

	  
102  
ideal of Russian society. It is a mistake to think that totalitarianism appeared only recently in the 
world. According to Professor Northrop and a few others, it existed years ago in Europe, although it 
is not classified as such by many people. It was a paternalistic system where certain leaders told the 
people what to do so that they would have the greatest good in life. The idea was: "You are like 
children; you are not developed. We are responsible for your welfare; we shall see what is good for 
you. You obey us and that is enough” Russian totalitarianism is the same but with a different 
philosophy. Its philosophy is based on dialectical materialism, while the other system in Europe 
was based on religious ideals. There is a world of difference between these two types of 
totalitarianism. However, if the true religious ideal does not remain strong, then the religious 
system deteriorates into the same type of totalitarianism as exists in Russia today.  
Totalitarianism as such is not to be blamed; it is the ideal which is at fault. Plato's Republic was to 
be guided by philosophers; but the Platonic philosophers were not like most of the philosophers 
today. They lived their philosophy, and as Platonists they believed that philosophy and life should 
not be isolated. In other words, the Platonic philosopher was he who had direct knowledge of the 
Reality, Truth, or Good. Unless he had the knowledge of the Reality, Truth, or Good, he was not a 
true philosopher. So he had to be a man of inner knowledge and conquest, established in truth. For 
Plato, to know is to act. Consequently, the behavior of the Platonic philosopher had to be changed 
and his personality wholly integrated.  
Fortunately, there are outstanding philosophers who agree with Plato's point of view and do not 
agree with John Dewey's interpretation. They also understand and practice the philosophy they 
teach. Professor Edgar S. Brightman, for example, writes of the need for a sound philosophy of 
life:– 
 It is true that the present age is an age in which philosophy is in considerable disrepute. 
Nevertheless philosophy is indispensable for life. There are many who ridicule theory and 
passionately praise practice. One would like to see a person of that sort try to build a subway or a 
ship, or try to fly an airplane by practice without theory. We do, alas, see him daily living his life 
without any principles, and we see the triumph of practice over theory in loose living, loose 
drinking, and loose thinking. Meanwhile those who have a theory, be it good or bad, develop 
gigantic power. The power of Russia has rested on the philosophy of dialectical materialism; the 
power of Nazi Germany, on "the National Socialist world view"; that of the Roman Catholic 
Church, on the philosophy of St. Thomas and the principles of revelation as interpreted by Church 
Councils; and that of America and all democratic nations, on a democratic philosophy of life. 
Never was philosophy of life more powerful, and never have philosophies been more in need of 
rational criticism, than today. A philosophy of life is indispensable for great living, individual or 
social; and a truth-seeking philosophy is indispensable for true living.151  
Ideas similar to Plato's were prescribed by ancient Hindu teachers. They also advocated a kind of 
republic which was to be inspired and governed by religious persons. This did not necessarily mean 
those who followed rituals and ceremonies or who were placed in exalted positions, but rather those 
who were completely integrated, who were thoroughly established in the knowledge of the Reality 
through conquest of their inner nature. Then and then alone were they fit to guide others.  
Only when individuals have inner knowledge and integration can they become unselfish and look 
after the welfare of others. Otherwise their emotions are not integrated and their personalities are 
not yet unified. They can grow to the level of a true philosopher or a religious man, provided they 
try to conquer their inner nature. Unfortunately, we find in any given society that there are few 
persons who are interested in the conquest of inner nature and the integration of personality. So 
there will always remain only a handful of persons who will be able to act without any selfish 
motive or any desire for power or usurpation.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
151	  Brightman, Nature and Values, p. 141. 	  

	  
103  
Those who are not established in the conquest of their inner nature will always move according to 
the dictates of their passions. They may talk of philosophy, religious ideals, equality, and 
brotherhood, but their behavior will reveal selfish motives. Thus not merely must the ideology be 
considered, but the ideal must be unified and established in the personality. If individuals cannot 
develop their personality and translate the ideal into action, then there cannot be a peaceful or 
harmonious society, regardless of whether the ideal is intellectual, philosophical, religious, or 
materialistic. This was shown during the Dark Ages and other periods of history in Europe and 
other parts of the world, and it is being shown again today all over the world.  
Although we are now becoming more aware that we are living in one world, there is still 
considerable prejudice between different races and groups. Take, for instance, the United States. 
Christians and Jews have a moderate amount of knowledge of each other in this country. Does this 
knowledge remove prejudice and preconceived notions between the two groups? Unfortunately, it 
does not. The same ancient prejudice lingers in the minds of many Christians and Jews, and is seen 
in their behavior toward one another. They do not act with such open hostility here, however, as in 
some other countries. A friend of ours told us that in the large cities of Poland, not long ago, a Jew 
would spit where a Christian had passed him, as if something unclean  had gone by. The Christians 
would do the same. Even though the expressions are modified in America, the feelings and tension 
are present; and whenever an unfortunate situation arises there is strong prejudice.  
Similarly, unfortunate and deplorable activities have been conducted in India by men who were 
intellectually great. They split the country and caused untold suffering for millions of people, not 
because they lacked the intellectual conception of higher ideals but because they were emotionally 
uncontrolled. Even when outstanding thinkers were trying to establish a world government and 
peace they aroused the masses to deplorable activities. Intellectualism does not necessarily go with 
integration of personality.  
When the emotions or passions are aroused, man descends to the level of animals; he becomes 
worse than the animals. What was not done in Germany a few years ago and what has not been 
done in Japan and India? Recently, Paul Hutchinson, Managing Editor of the Christian Century, 
spoke frankly about conditions in Japan. Every American who knows about it must be ashamed of 
some of his fellow countrymen. Last year, two of our American friends related to us their 
experiences in India. They said: "We hated to admit that we were Americans over there. We were 
ashamed of the way the Americans behaved and the way they lowered themselves in Oriental 
countries." Should we conclude that those Americans were intellectually weak? Many of them were 
college boys or high school boys. They did not lack intelligence but they lacked emotional control. 
So they lowered the ideal of the Americans in the eyes of the Oriental countries. Wendell Willkie 
reported that American prestige is practically dead in he Orient. This is not due to a lack of 
intellectualism but rather to lack of emotional integration.  
Although some might think that intellectualism would solve the conflict, unfortunately, 
intellectualists often cannot stand up under temptation. When their philosophy of life remains the 
attainment of the greatest amount of pleasure on the sense plane, they deteriorate, as the 
contemporary history of the West proves. Their intellectualism is used for destructive purposes in 
the name of national security. Scientists are devoting themselves to the service of the government. 
They have sacrificed everything  for the cause of the government. Nevertheless, there is a group of 
scientists in this country who oppose the use of scientific knowledge by political and military 
leaders and who refuse to divulge their scientific knowledge to those leaders, knowing that 
intellectualism should remain free from all influences. They are making a noble attempt; but, 
unfortunately, the attempt will remain limited to a small number. The rest will go with the crowd 
because of their misguided philosophy of life. They cannot be blamed, because they think that 
power in international growth, in sense enjoyment, is the supreme goal of life.  

	  
104  
It is interesting to note what a great psychologist in America has to say about what he calls the 
master-sentiment and what we call the supreme goal of life. Professor Allport writes:– 
 Religion and therapy are alike in their insistence upon the need for greater unification and order in 
personality. Both recognize that the healthy mind requires an hierarchical organization of 
sentiments, ordinarily with one master-sentiment holding the dominant position. Psychotherapy 
does not insist that the strong central interest should be religious in character, although this 
possibility, as I have just said, is ordinarily recognized and respected. But from the point of view of 
psychotherapy sentiments dealing with family, art, sports, business, would be equally good if they 
succeeded in marshaling energy and bestowing order in life. Religion is bound to disagree at this 
point, asking whether such sentiments are adequate to sustain personality.152  
It is religion that can save us today. The religious ideal can help us in personal and national 
integration and in the integration of society, because religion emphasizes the conquest of man's 
inner nature. Religion can be considered as such so long as it stresses control of the lower nature 
and manifestation of the higher nature of man. It is not religion if it does not hold to the supreme 
ideal of life. From time to time, even many so-called religious leaders have forgotten the religious 
ideal of life and have become degraded. Though they have called themselves religious, they have 
deteriorated into materialistic totalitarians for all practical purposes. How aptly Professor Allport 
says:– 
 Religion, we conclude, is superior to psychotherapy in the allowance it makes for the affiliative 
need in human nature. But when it comes to a question of implementing this insight we are 
confronted by the age long failure of religion to turn doctrine into practice. More and more people 
seem impatient with the shortcomings of un-acted religious profession. A host of accusations 
arise. 8  
The religious ideal, then, must be kept ablaze constantly if we want integration of ourselves and 
society and removal of the tension which has been created in the modern world; and the religious 
ideal can be kept ablaze only by the integration of personality. Although a whole nation or society 
is not at once lifted to a higher r plane through inner conquest, it can be done on an individual basis 
and those individuals can influence others to do the same. That is the reason Swami Vivekananda 
says that the more the individuals can conquer their inner nature and manifest their higher or divine 
nature, the greater and more stable society will be.  
When there are many integrated personalities in human society, civilization rises. Their influence is 
felt by the masses. Sri Krishna tells us in the Bhagavad-Gita that whatever a great man does will be 
done by the masses. If the greatness of a man is understood from a religious point of view— that he 
can conquer himself, love others, and serve the world — then we are bound to follow his ideal. It is 
high time for every thinking man to fortify himself by the ideal of self-conquest, if he wants to 
remove tension, individually and collectively. When the emotions and passions are conquered and 
directed by individuals to the highest realization of life, then those persons become centers of 
spiritual power which they can disseminate. Through this method alone can a harmonious society 
be established.  
This conquest must be accomplished by practical means. Intellectually it may be understood, but a 
person cannot hold to it unless it is applied in everyday life. He becomes religious when he 
regulates his everyday life, when he does everything with the spirit of service and consecration, 
when he conquers his passions, integrates his personality, and manifests his divine nature. Then 
alone can he become a powerful personality and lift people to the higher plane. Then alone can the 
problem of tension be solved.    
 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
152	  Allport, The Individual and His Religion, p. 79. 	  

	  
105  
Chapter 15 
Is Religion Escapism 
(some pages missing) 
study of these cases that all religious persons are seeking a fictitious or imaginative God. 
Clarification is needed as to why and how man seeks God and finds Him, actually and truly.  
No doubt some persons who are disturbed by the problems of the world or who have a sense of 
inadequacy therefore seek help and redemption from God. But there are many others who have a 
right understanding of life, who have the spirit of inquiry, and who want to regulate their emotions 
so that they can have the greatest amount of peace in life. They analyze, philosophize, and make 
efforts to attain the knowledge of God. There are still others who want to know God immediately 
and directly. Sri Krishna classifies those who seek religion or God into four groups:– 
 "Four kinds of virtuous men worship Me, — O Arjuna, the distressed, the seeker of knowledge, 
the seeker of enjoyment, and the wise …….”153  
It is true that one group of people seeks the help of God to get rid of troubles and disturbances 
physical and mental. Perhaps Watson has this group in mind. People find it very difficult to cope 
with the problems of life. Naturally they seek a supernatural, extra-cosmic Being or personified 
nature to help them to get rid of pain and suffering. Some also approach God to overcome the 
onslaughts of nature.  
Those who seek enjoyment approach God to get something positive from Him either in the form of 
things or qualities, knowing that they, by themselves, cannot get them. Some seek wealth, health, 
name, fame, power, or position through God when they feel a sense of their own inadequacy. 
Perhaps Freud had this group in mind and concluded, as did Watson, that all men seek God either 
through a sense of fear or guilt. There is a tendency among some of the psychologists of religion in 
the West to conclude that the desire for spiritual life arises from a sense of guilt. This is clearly 
expressed by Dr. Edwin Diller Starbuck:_ 
……. The result of an analysis of these different shades of experience coincides with the common 
designation of this pre-conversion state in making the central fact in it all the sense of sin, while 
the other conditions are various manifestations of this, as determined, first, by differences in 
temperament, and, second, by whether the ideal life or the sinful life is vivid in consciousness.154  
Dr. Starbuck further states that: "Conversion is a process of struggling away from sin, rather than of 
striving toward consciousness.”155 And again he says: "The sense of sin and depression of feeling 
are fundamental factors in conversion if not in religious experience in general.”156 Professor James 
also writes:– 
 ….. To begin with, there are two things in the mind of the candidate for conversion: first, the 
present incompleteness or wrongness, the "sin" which he is eager to escape from and second, the 
positive ideal which he longs to compass. Now with most of us the sense of our present 
wrongness is a far more distinct piece of our consciousness than is the imagination of any positive 
ideal we can aim at. In a majority of cases, indeed, the "sin" almost exclusively engrosses the 
attention ….. 157  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
153	  Srimad-Bhagavad Gita 7: 16. 	  
154	  Edwin Diller Starbuck, The Psychology of Religion (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1899), p. 58. 	  
155	  Ibid., p. 64.  
156	  Ibid., p. 67.  
157	  William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience, p. 209. 	  

	  
106  
In the next group are those who have the spirit of inquiry and really want to know and understand 
God. They want to get something positive in the form of love, purity, truthfulness, and so forth. 
They do not necessarily seek God because of fear; their motivation is far greater than consciousness 
of sin or guilt; in fact, the search for knowledge of God seems to be the most effective dynamic 
force behind religion. This group of people want to know the real nature of God and their 
relationship to Him. They are the real seekers of God. There are two distinct types belonging to this 
group. One type is predominantly emotional; the individuals want to express love for God, feeling 
that their love for Him will fully satisfy their emotional requirements. They think of Him as mother, 
father, friend, companion, master, child, or beloved, and express their love to Him through one of 
these relationships. Many of them also want love from God.  
The second type is motivated purely by the pursuit of truth. The individuals approach God entirely 
from an intellectual point of view. The whole ambition and aim of this group is attainment of the 
knowledge of God or the Self, or the Reality. In the words of Socrates: "Man, know thyself." They 
do not accept the existence of God because they hear or read about Him, nor are they satisfied with 
conceptual or philosophical knowledge of Him. Their whole motive is to experience Him. Their 
knowledge is of the higher empirical type, or what the Hindus call Samadhi (superconsciousness).158 
This is what is known as mysticism, which is nothing but the direct and immediate experience of 
God. The great devotees and mystics belonging to the established religions are generally found in 
this group. According to Professor Brightman:– 
 Of the traits of that experience, the most important for the knowledge of God is the one called by 
William James its noetic quality. The mystic believes that he knows God in an immediate and 
absolutely certain experience. The knowledge may be ineffable; in* fact, all immediate 
experience is ineffable. No definition can tell what the quality of purple color is, or the color of a 
rose; one who tries to tell of such matters can only hope that his words will be addressed to one 
who has had a similar experience. Otherwise the words are meaningless. So is it with experience 
of God.159  
Some of those who want to get rid of pain and agony or who want to get something out of God have 
sometimes been observed to develop gradually into real seekers of God. Whether they are 
emotional or intellectual, all seekers of God start with a sense of sin or inadequacy and move 
toward knowledge and experience of God at their own pace.  
The fourth group of people who worship God are those who are already well established in 
religious experiences. They seek to remain in communion with God because they already know 
Him. They have experienced Him and are satisfied and peaceful. There is no disturbance in their 
minds regarding the attainments of the world in the form of enjoyment, power, position, name, or 
fame. They have already reached the supreme goal. Whether they are of the emotional or 
intellectual type, they have a continuous sense of the Reality. Even in their ordinary behavior and 
interpersonal relationships they show the effect of their direct experience of God in the form of 
love, compassion, understanding, and other such qualities. In fact, they are the most integrated 
personalities that the world knows. They go beyond the ritualistic type of religion to the actual, 
first-hand religion, namely direct realization of God.  
In the light of the facts of religious living and mystical experiences, Watsonians and Freudians are 
mistaken in their conclusions that religion is based on the medieval medicine man or father 
complex. Most of these modern psychologists are not at all scientific in their observations and 
generalizations. Unfortunately, they completely miss the mark of scientific pursuit in the field of 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
158	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology, chap. 10, "The Super-conscious State." Works, I, 181. Spiritual Teachings 
of Swami Brahmanda, pp. 126 and 139	  
159	  Brightman, A Philosophy of Religion, p. 168.  
	  

	  
107  
religion. They do not realize that the pathological states of mind cannot really attain the final goal 
of religion the experience of the Ultimate Reality that, on the contrary, the prerequisite of religious 
life is integration of the emotions and personality.  
In this connection Karl A. Menninger writes about "Ascetism and Martyrdom” in his book Man 
Against Himself:– 
"Ascetism, for example, with its varied and ingenious devices for prolonging existence for the 
purpose of enduring more deprivation, is the very refinement of slow death”160  
He also groups the motives of ascetics, neurotics, and alcoholics in the category of chronic suicide. 
He continues:– 
 Then there are other forms of chronic suicide which are more dramatic, such as martyrdom and 
so-called "chronic bad luck” in which the individual, perhaps by provocative means, instigates his 
own destruction and bears it nobly. Here the subtlety consists in the deftness with which the 
victim manipulates his situation to his own ends, and then capitalizes upon it, all unconsciously of 
course.161  
It seems that Karl Menninger is a thoroughgoing Freudian in his understanding of the death wish as 
a basic urge. So he interprets every kind of sacrifice and unselfish living in terms of the suicide 
tendency. One cannot help wondering how any psychologist could come to such a drastic 
conclusion in the name of science after studying about the incidents in the lives of the so-called 
ascetics whom we designate as great religious leaders, such as St. Francis of Assisi and St. Teresa 
of Avila in the Christian tradition and Swami Vivekananda and others in the Indian tradition. It is 
needless to mention the name of Buddha. Do not thinkers like Menninger realize that religious 
persons who express unselfish love for the good of mankind are inspired, not by a desire to commit 
suicide but rather by the noble sentiment of love? Of course, every man has a right to interpret even 
the noblest sentiments in any way he likes. Yet some interpretations are mere distortions.  
At least nine books have been written by psychiatrists and others within the last hundred years in an 
attempt to prove that Jesus was a paranoiac with other mental disturbances.162  These charges have 
been discussed and refuted in Hindu View of Christ.163 If one is to be scientific, he must take into 
account all available facts and then come to his conclusions. We admit that there are some morbid 
personalities who have the tendencies that Menninger enumerates in his book. But it is unscientific 
on the part of a scientist to generalize from the study of morbid cases and conclude that all ascetism 
is based on the desire for suicide. Of course, he may have his own definition of ascetism, but the 
definition of this word in the dictionaries does not at all justify his interpretation. Religious 
individuals who impose on themselves a certain form of discipline and self-control are not going 
through a gradual process of suicide but they are rather 'finding satisfaction in the higher aspects of 
life. They are the people who are fully satisfied and joyous.  
Some psychologists have adopted Menninger's method of condemning religious attitudes, 
experiences, and values. One of these, Professor James H. Leuba, in his books The Psychology of 
Religious Mysticism and God or Man?, discounts religious experiences and values with a great deal 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
160	  Menninger, Man Against Himself, p. 87. 	  
161	  Ibid  	  
162	  David Friedrich Strauss, The Life of Jesus Revised for the German People (1865). H - J- Holtzmann, The Messianic 
Consciousness of Jesus (1907). Herman Werner, "The Historical Jesus of Liberal Theology, A Psychotic," The New 
Ecclesiastical Journal, XXII (1911), pp. 347–390. Oskar Holtzmann, Was Jesus an Ecstatic? (1903). Julius Baumann, 
The Character of Jesus (1908). George de Loosten (Dr. George Lomer), Jesus Christ from the Standpoint of Psychiatry 
(Bamberg, 1905). William Hirsch, Conclusions of a Psychiatrist (New York, 1918), pp. 87-164. Charles Binet-Sangle, 
The Insanity of Jesus  3rd ed., Vols. I, II; 1st ed., Vols. Ill, IV (Paris, 1911-1915). Emil Rasmussen, Jesus, A 
Comparative Study in Psychopathology (Leipzig, 1905). 	  
163	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu View of Christ, pp. 18-20 

	  
108  
of apparent rationalism. He does not hesitate to call the mystics neurotics and often predominantly 
sexual. Like Menninger, he interprets the mystic experiences with a great deal of ingenuity and sees 
in them some of his preconceived notions and theories of human urges or sentiments. He says:– 
 If the World would not feed his ambition and appease his aspiring heart, the Church and God 
should. He soon came to be of the opinion that the holy life had provided him with grander 
triumphs and greater love than the World could have offered him.  
Similarly with Ignatius Loyola; when, in consequence of the loss of a leg, a glorious career in the 
armies, of his earthly sovereign had become impossible, he sought and found compensation in the 
service of God and the Church.164  
He also interprets many of the utterances of St. Teresa of Avila in terms of the sex urge, following 
the lead of Havelock Ellis and Sigmund Freud. To quote again:– 
 This mixture of exquisite pain with incomparable delight is usual in mystical love-ecstasy. The 
pain, as much as the pleasure, indicates most probably, as we shall see, the participation of sex 
organs tormented by an insufficient stimulation.165   
He gives the same interpretation of the ecstasies of St. Catherine of Genoa and St. Margaret Marie.  
We wonder why he did not discover that there is a psychosomatic relationship in the human 
structure. When a man intensely feels the Crucifixion of Christ, for instance, and such other 
incidents, could there not be also a physical reaction and expression of similar intensity? Does he 
not know that St. Francis of Assisi had stigmata, and that others have also shown such symptoms 
due to their intense love for Christ? In short, the spiritual may be the true cause of the physical 
symptoms. Perhaps psychologists like Leuba have not reckoned with the present trend toward a 
psychosomatic interpretation of human existence. We wonder if a man should not hesitate before 
interpreting religious states which are foreign to his own experiences. Would Leuba accept the 
statements of a theologian who judged the discoveries of nuclear scientists without himself having 
been in the laboratory? Similarly, the psychologists of religion first ought to go through the required 
training in order to be able to evaluate expertly the experiences and values of religion. Of course, 
every man has a right to express what he thinks, be it reasonable or unreasonable, but let it not be 
regarded as scientific interpretation when it is not based on adequate experimentation.  
Orthodox Freudian analysts and psychologists like Leuba and others who follow the lead of Freud, 
in a peculiar way identify human energy with their interpretation of libido, namely, the sex urge. 
But the power in man cannot be equated to the function of sex. Does a man operate only on that 
plane? It seems that they are reducing human beings to a level worse than that of animals in their 
interpretation of human energy. Psychiatrists like Jung differ with them in their interpretation of the 
libido; Jung calls it a vital force.166  Philosophers like Henri Bergson also take a broad viewpoint on 
vital energy (elan vital). Any rational thinker who has a broader view of human nature cannot help 
but regard as unscientific and non-rational the interpretation of the libido given by the Freudian type 
of thinkers. The pity is that Leuba and others take certain facts and interpret them according to their 
own ideas. To our way of thinking, man has power. It can be expressed in various ways through — 
sex, knowledge, and also spirituality. The mystics or religious leader direct their vital force call it 
— libido or anything you like — to the spiritual reality instead of directing it through the channels 
of sex, self-expression, or other such urges.  
It is amazing to note how a keen intellectual can interpret things to suit his own purpose and thereby 
do great damage to human society. Little do such psychologists and psychiatrists think that their 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
164	  James H. Leuba, The Psychology of Religious Mysticism (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1925), p. 121. 	  
165	  Ibid.,p. 144  
	  
166	  Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul. 	  

	  
109  
interpretation of an experience may be incorrect. The experience of laughter can be produced by 
various reasons. There is a common expression that a fool laughs at a joke three times: once 
because other people laugh, the second time because he understands the joke, and the third time 
because he realizes what a fool he was not to understand it at first. McDougall's experience with 
different interpretations of the same dream by various psychoanalysts illustrates how interpretation 
can become faulty because of the preconceived notions of psychologists and psychiatrists.167 
In God or Man?, Professor Leuba seemed to hope that religion will die out. He writes:– 
 In the moral realm also, the religious method is rapidly being displaced. In the hands of 
specialists in character formation and reformation scientific methods prove their superiority and 
crowd the religions out of a sphere of activity which they have long regarded as preeminently 
their own. Thus, the ‘religious’ method seems destined to suffer the fate of magic, because, like 
magic, it cannot stand comparison with the scientific methods of maintaining and enhancing 
life.168  
Professor Leuba seems to be ruthless in his condemnation of yoga practices in India. In fact, his 
evaluation of yoga practices and their goals is unscientific and dogmatic. Evidently, he never cared 
to study them systematically and understand what they really are. So he concludes that experiences 
in yoga are induced by drugs and narcotics and intoxicating liquor. We admit that there have been 
some such addicts who want to associate themselves with some forms of Hindu and Buddhist 
religious practices. These forms originated during the disintegrating period of Buddhist culture and 
continued in some Tantric and Buddhist practices. But they are not regarded as the true spirit of 
yoga; nor does any sensible man in India regard narcotic states as yoga experiences. Leuba should 
understand that yoga practices enable a man to integrate his emotions, unify his personality, and 
finally attain the actual experience of the ultimate Reality. The test of those experiences is fully 
discussed in this book and in Hindu Psychology.  
The criticism Leuba makes can be directed only to abuses of religious practices in all religious 
groups. But no religious man belonging to any group will take those abuses to mean religious 
realization. Leuba and others, as scientists, should remain objective and thorough in their 
evaluation. Otherwise, they will mislead the people, the effect being noticed in modern society. 
These psychologists and psychiatrists, as well as social philosophers, can be made responsible for 
erroneous interpretation of religious ideals, religious practices, and religious achievements. We 
refer these people to Swami Vivekananda's four books on Yoga, Sir John Woodruff's Serpent 
Power (a translation of a Tantric book called Sat-chakra-nirupana), Dhammapada (Sayings of 
Buddha), and other such Buddhist writings.  
Something may be said in explanation of Leuba and others. If they cannot understand the mystic 
practices and experiences in the Christian tradition, how can they understand yoga techniques and 
realizations, even though many of the yoga practices are similar to those of the great Christian 
mystics? Swami Brahmananda used to tell his disciples that until the mind is purified one cannot 
comprehend higher spiritual realizations. In fact, these thoughts do not arise in unprepared minds.169 
Sankara — in the first part of his works dealing with the requirements for the study of the inner 
spirit of Vedanta — and Patanjali, the father of Hindu psychology — in his first aphorism — 
declare that unless the mind is trained it cannot really go through higher spiritual practices nor can 
one understand the higher truth.  
It is a joy to note that there are thinkers who are equally scientific and at the same time who, as true 
scientists, do not have preconceived notions. We present Dr. Allport's point of view:–  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
167	  McDougall, Outline of Abnormal Psychology. 	  
168	  James H. Leuba, God or Man? (London: C. A. Watts & Co., 1933), P 299   
169	  Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 146.  
	  

	  
110  
Some critics argue that religion at best is namby-pamby suggestion therapy, providing blinders 
for some, patches and crutches for others. Suggestion therapy, they argue, does little excepting 
anaesthetize the individual to the starkly realistic problems confronting him. They add, correctly 
enough, that unless a person can face the deeply pessimistic elements in his situation he is not 
likely to solve his problems either with psychotherapy or religion. In support of their argument 
these critics point to the shoppers who wander from one religious cult to another, learning here, 
that their problems are illusory; there, that they should listen for the "vibrations"; and elsewhere, 
that in the world to come there will be fish fries and dancing. Yet the critics fail to perceive that it 
is only religious immaturity that seeks suggestive therapy of this sort. A mature religious 
sentiment is neither escapist nor evasive.170  
Williams James and James Bissett Pratt, who preceded Professor Allport and other such broad 
psychologists, showed a truly scientific attitude. It is also important to note what a great American 
philosopher, Dr. Douglas V. Steere, has to say about ascetism. He is not an ascetic himself but he is 
deeply interested in spiritual life. He understands the values of religious experiences, not merely 
from what he calls "bookish" interests but from actual participation in the practices. He writes:– 
 In all asceticism the principle of abstaining from things that are precious and good (from food, 
from speech, from physical comforts, from marriage) for the sake of accentuating something 
more good in itself is a sound principle and is sound practice, so long as it is done voluntarily and 
joyously and not grimly, and so long as it can be regarded as a matter of private vocation and is 
not universally pressed on others.171  
There are others who, although they do not attack religion itself as escapism, consider as such 
certain phases of religious life. During our university life in Calcutta, an English missionary taught 
us the constitutional history of Europe. He was regarded as an authority on the three R's — 
Reformation, Renaissance, and Revolution. He was very enthusiastic in his condemnation of 
monastic life. In reply, we quoted to him the monastic vow that is taken by both Hindus and 
Buddhists: "For the good of many, for the happiness of many, or the realization of God, and to help 
others do the same." The monastic vow of the Christians is similar.  
This gentleman and many others have criticized this one phase of religious life. They claim that 
ascetics or monks are parasites. In the Orient and in the West it is often said that the monastic 
orders are fostering parasites because they receive the goods of the world and do not contribute to 
the world. They are enjoying the modern conveniences of life and many people have worked that 
they may enjoy the comforts and sit comfortably thinking of God. Would they have thought of God 
if they did not have these comforts? In the North, they would be destroyed by snowstorms and 
blizzards without shelter. So they depend upon others to give them these things. What are they 
giving in return? These are legitimate questions and questions that are especially urged by 
Communists.  
Our answer is that when a monk or a nun or anyone else finds God in himself, he finds the Infinite 
in others. The result is that he becomes a proper person to love his neighbor as himself. Many 
persons forget that they are to love their neighbors as the veritable manifestations of their real Self 
or God or the Absolute. St. Francis of Assisi was inspired by love for God and love for man and he 
established the Franciscan Order so that the monks would not only live an intense life of God-
consciousness but would also be the servants of mankind.  
He certainly introduced a great reformation of the whole Christian tradition of that period. The 
spirit of self-sacrifice and dedicated service of man is the keynote of the Franciscan Order. We 
know what would be the condition of the Christian Church today were it not for the advent of this 
great man, St. Francis of Assisi, and others of that period. Similar orders were also established by 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
170	  Allport, The Individual and His Religion, p. 82. 	  
171	  Douglas V. Steere, On Beginning from Within (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1943), pp. 66-67. 	  

	  
111  
other great Christian leaders. One of the latest in the Christian tradition, the Society of Friends or 
the Quakers, also teaches that a man of "inner light" should be the servant of mankind.  
Another Christian leader used to say that monks were like dry leaves drifting here and there. They 
had no standing or stamina. He also said that he often noticed that certain members of religious 
groups become extremely egocentric after they entered middle age. After forty they thought only of 
themselves and become anxious about their power and position. We admit that people can become 
egocentric, but it is not because they are monks or nuns, or householders single or married. It is 
rather because they do not have an absorbing interest in the real spirit of religion. Time and again, 
we have seen many persons in the world who were supposed to be living for the good of many but 
who had become egocentric and fascinated by themselves, because they did not have an absorbing 
interest in the higher spirit of religious life. There have, of course, been abuses of monastic life; but 
it would be a blunder to consider the abuses as a result of the monastic ideal of life.  
Critics criticize the abuses of religion as if they were religion itself. About four years ago, Swami 
Vishwananda and I were having dinner in a Chinese restaurant. Some of the waiters were Chinese 
college students. Seeing that we were Orientals, they approached us and after a little conversation 
said: "The white people are exploiting your country and our country because we are too religious." 
They felt that religion was the cause of the downfall and exploitation of India and China, and that 
the only remedy for this was to discard religion. We replied: "We are not quite sure that your 
diagnosis is correct. We wonder if it is not that your people and our people in India and China have 
a misconception of religion or are not practicing religion properly." This is not only the complaint 
of the Chinese. In India some of the young people feel that religion is the opiate of the ignorant. The 
Russians were told by their leaders that religion kept the Russian people under the subjugation of 
the Czarist Government or bourgeois capitalists; the Church was the cause of the poverty, 
degradation, and ignorance of the people. So they overthrew both the Czarist Government and the 
Church. This idea is invading both the East and the West. Some of the Easterners, Hindus and 
Chinese, and some of the Westerners, feel that religion is escapism or an opiate for the weaklings. 
 There is another group known as "humanists" which is rather critical of religion. These people are 
associated with religion and they consider themselves religious people; but their interpretation of 
religion is quite different from that of Jesus, Hindu teachers, or other great founders of religion. 
They do not talk of God but rather strongly emphasize the second commandment of Jesus: "Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor." According to them, religion is to be focused on man; service to man is all 
that is needed. A person can be religious without thinking or talking of God. Religion is needed, but 
it is meant for ethical living; society cannot stand without proper ethical principles. We are social 
beings and should know how to work and live together; society will not hold together without the 
spirit of cooperation and coordination. In order to have a cooperative society, there must be a 
certain number of ethical principles. People must be truthful and kind and must help their 
neighbors. There have been humanists in the East since the time of Buddha, but Buddhist humanists 
are quite different from those in the West. While Babbitt and others in America have stressed that 
the purpose of religion is fulfilled when man does good to man and establishes a healthy, 
cooperative society, the Buddhists have based their humanism on the search for the state in which 
there is cessation of pain. Buddhism is founded on the four truths, namely:  
(1) there is suffering in life;  
(2) pain has a cause;  
(3) pain will cease to exist;  
(4) there is a way to overcome pain.172  
 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
172	  Dhammapada, trans. Max Muller, XIV: 191	  

	  
112  
The fourth truth has eight steps, right thinking, right living, right meditation, and so forth. In this we 
find the true basis of Buddhist humanitarianism in consecrated living. The primary emphasis of 
Buddhist humanism is on the realization of truth, the cessation of suffering, and the expansion of 
consciousness rather than on merely doing good to others. In Buddhism, humanism or doing good 
to others is, in a way, the method for reaching the ultimate goal, nirvana, which is the cessation of 
the empirical self and the culmination of consciousness.  
Modern humanism is not the main purpose of real religion; it is rather a secondary issue, a by-
product. Real religion is knowledge and awareness of the Reality. Some people say that love of God 
will solve our problems. However, few people express love of God when they face the problems of 
life. Many of those who talk and write about it are the ones who reveal little love of God or 
neighbor in dealing with their problems. Is this the fault of any particular individual? No, it is the 
fault of the human mind. The love that is talked about: or written about is not manifested until a 
person has had some experience of God. Therefore, in order to reach a real state of religion a person 
must have direct and immediate knowledge of God.  
Our answer to the humanists is that they can do good to the world only when they find God in 
themselves and the world. Our answer to some of the psychologists and psychiatrists is that the idea 
of God did not come from the medieval medicine man or from the father complex; the idea of God 
came from the search for the Reality, from the search for bliss. With this understanding, complexes 
and conflicts can be dissolved. Spiritual practices integrate the emotions and stabilize the 
personality. A person is thoroughly integrated when he is established in God. Mental disturbances 
have no place in true religion. When a man in pursuit of abiding happiness stabilizes his personality 
and is established in bliss, he transmits his achievements to society. He becomes a thoroughgoing 
altruist expressing love to all, as we see in the lives of the great mystics of all religions.  
Now let us consider whether religion itself is escapism; then we can consider whether monastic life 
is escapism. What does religion give us and what is its value? Is it a refuge from the realities of life? 
Jesus did not take His disciples away from the world to ignore it or escape from it; He wanted them 
to be free from the evils of the world, to be in it but not of it.  
I pray not that them shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them 
from evil.  
They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.  
As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world.173  
 
These statements of Jesus require considerable clarification, for many people misunderstand them. 
He was not the only religious leader who wanted to save His followers and through them successive 
generations from misinterpretation, misunderstanding, and misuse of the world. Swami 
Vivekananda describes religion as the manifestation of the divinity that is already in man. Can 
anyone construe this sentence as defeatism and escapism from the realities of life? Is man running 
away from the world in religious life? We find an answer in Dr. Allport's statement: "A religious 
sentiment is neither escapist nor evasive."174 Man finds the greatest expression of his real self in 
religion. Leuba regards mystical experiences as worse than escapism. According to what he writes 
in two of his books, he seems to feel that such experiences could be produced by autosuggestion 
and by drugs. He says: "Thus, the mystical ecstasy is in part the outcome of the mystic's 
expectations, and, therefore, may be regarded as a product of autosuggestion."175 Then he writes:– 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
173	  John 17: 15-16, 18.  
174	  Allport, The Individual and His Religion, p. 82. 25  
175	  Leuba, The Psychology of Religious Mysticism, p. 157.  

	  
113  
 These drugs not only bring about relaxation and somnolence, but the mental activity that persists 
seems alien to the subject's own will. Under the influence of these drugs he becomes passive and 
yet he dreams, sees visions, and enjoys an impression of delightful freedom and unlimited 
power.176  
Perhaps Leuba does not realize that autosuggestion cannot give anything more than a man 
possesses. Hypnotism or autosuggestion generally disintegrate the personality. Similarly, drugs do 
not produce any actual knowledge of the Reality nor do they integrate the personality. On the 
contrary, the drug addict gradually becomes less than what is called normal. On the other hand, 
religion brings out the finest qualities in man; it brings out his divine nature; it makes him aware of 
what he really is, Swami Vivekananda clarifies this in his statement:–  
What makes the difference? From one state a man comes out the very same man that he went in, 
and from another state the man comes out enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole 
character changed, his life changed, illumined. These are the two effects. Now the effects being 
different, the causes must be different. As this illumination with which a man comes back from 
Samadhi is much higher than can be got from unconsciousness, or much higher than can be got 
by reasoning in a conscious state, it must therefore be super-consciousness, and Samadhi is called 
the super-conscious state.177  
A man is not selfish when he seeks to find his real Self in a monastery or any other place. When he 
finds his own Self or soul, he finds the souls of others, because there is only one Soul. If a person 
touches the Atlantic Ocean near Boston, he has touched the whole Atlantic Ocean. He does not 
have to go to New York or Atlantic City. When a person touches the Reality in himself, he is 
touching the Reality of his friends and others. Experience proves that when a man has realized God, 
he sees the presence of God in others and in the whole world. He feels the presence of that 
luminous substance everywhere. He knows that the Absolute cannot be limited by geographical, 
racial, or denominational consciousness. When a Jewish man experiences God, he finds Him in the 
Christian, too; when a Hindu experiences God, he finds Him in the Muslim. God cannot be limited 
to a Hindu, Christian, or Jew, although many ignorant persons think that it is only possible to 
experience Him through a particular denomination, creed, or racial affiliation. This shows ignorance 
of the real nature of God. St. Francis of Assisi could say "Brother Wolf" and "Sister Moon" because 
he felt the divine presence everywhere, even in animals and plants. The effect of his personality on 
others was wonderful; through his influence, the wolf of Gubbio was transformed.  
So religion is not for running away from the world but for finding the divine in the world. Religion 
teaches us to see God in ourselves and then in the world. A person cannot see God in the world until 
he finds God in himself. In one of the Upanishads it is said: "In the Infinite alone there is bliss and 
not in the finite."178 The trouble that arises in the world is based on the misunderstanding that the 
finite is the real. We see an individual and identify him as Mr. Smith. A few years later, perhaps a 
few months later, there will not be any visible trace of this man. He did not exist as Mr. Smith a few 
years ago. However, behind this man, this manifested form, is the real. Religion teaches us to find 
the real in the manifested. When we find this, the soul of man, then alone we find what we are all 
seeking bliss and joy. In another Upanishad it is described: "That one who is the self-made is verily 
the joy”179 In other words, the Infinite is bliss, joy. God is joy.  
Everyone is anxious to find happiness. Some persons think that they will be happy when they have 
power and position; others are seeking the same thing in the accumulation of wealth; some look for 
it in forms of self-expression; still others try to find it in the security of a home and family life. The 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
176	  Ibid. 
177	  Works, I, 181.  
178	  Chhandogya Upanishad, chap. VII, sec. 23. 	  
179	  "Brahmananda Valli," Taittiriya Upanishad, chap. VII. 	  

	  
114  
vast majority of the people seek happiness through the finite quality of the senses, and the result is 
extreme unhappiness. There is no satisfaction in the finite life. Instead of finding peace, a person 
wants more and more. Children are often heard to ask for more and more. Adults are ashamed to 
say so, but their activities reveal that their desires are multiplying. No one can be condemned for 
that because man will never be satisfied until he finds the Infinite. His nature is infinite and the 
Infinite cannot be satisfied by the finite. A man may get degree after degree in the universities or 
millions and millions of dollars but he will remain unsatisfied. Does anyone know of a wealthy man 
who is satisfied? Was there ever a satisfied imperialist? He may have a big empire to rule but he 
will want a still larger one, because he has the wrong attitude toward life. If anyone else were in the 
same position as the imperialist, he would manifest the same qualities, provided he had the same 
attitude toward life. It isn't the world that drags a man down; it is the attitude of the man toward the 
world that drags him down. So if a man wants satisfaction and happiness, he must try to find the 
Infinite in the finite. Religion teaches the method of finding the Infinite. 
 When a man sees God in himself, he sees Him in the world; and the world can never affect him. Sri 
Ramakrishna used to say that it is the mind rather than the world that binds a person. It is the mind 
that thinks of a person as a sinner or a thief. Again, it is the mind that thinks of a man as the 
veritable manifestation of God. A person's relationship with another will be different when the 
presence of God is seen in him. When the presence of God is seen in the world, a person will serve 
the world. The servants of the world are those who are thoroughly established in the knowledge of 
God. Can you find better servants of the world than St. Francis of Assisi and Swami Vivekananda? 
We would like to See anyone who could serve the world as thoroughly as Swami Vivekananda. The 
secret of his service was the highest realization of God. He felt the identity of the divine all over the 
world. He did not make any differentiation between Hindu or Mohammedan, Jew or Christian, 
American or Indian, because he saw God in all. So if a person wants to do good in the world, he 
must find the source of joy and bliss first. That is the very reason that Jesus gave as the first part of 
His commandment: "Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God . . ."  
The dynamic of religion is expressed in the form of personal awareness of God and feeling His 
presence in all. Because of this experience, a truly religious man becomes a source of inspiration to 
the world, as we find in Buddha, Jesus, and Sri Ramakrishna. His living example inspires others. 
Consequently, a new spirit is instilled into civilization.  
The power of religion is felt not only in individual life but also in collective life. As the different 
members of society live in the consciousness of the presence of God, they establish the true spirit of 
cooperation and coordination. In fact, a harmonious society can be established only when the ideal 
of society is to feel the presence of God in the different members. To illustrate this, we can consider 
the various periods of Hindu, Buddhist, and Christian culture. In fact, a high type of civilization 
arises only when the religious ideal feeling the presence of God and loving one's neighbor becomes 
the predominant factor of society. We have seen and we know mystics and monks who seemingly 
live away from society; yet their love for human beings is intense. They are altruistic. In no way are 
they inferior to the mystics and religious persons who are living and working in the service of man. 
Of course, there are some selfish individuals in all stages of life; but it is the height of folly to 
conclude that a person who is dedicated to the knowledge and love of God is an escapist. On the 
contrary, as he experiences the universal Being his inner nature expands and he can embrace the 
whole world. The utterances and activities of Swami Vivekananda and St. Francis of Assisi prove 
that genuine mystics are thoroughgoing altruists.  
They are the persons who teach others to become altruists. Real religion is not escapism or running 
away from the realities of life. It is the everyday application of the love of God and the love of 
neighbor and the manifestation of divinity that is already in man. All personal and interpersonal 
conflicts vanish. This spirit can alone establish harmony in the individual himself and in society.  

	  
115  
CHAPTER 16 
Power Through Religious Practices 
IFE can become dreary and disagreeable the moment we turn our minds from God to things 
of the world. This does not mean that it is necessary to give up the world as such, but it does 
mean that the primary emphasis should be given to God and the understanding of Him rather 
than to the attainment of things of the world. If we do not give our attention to God, even worldly 
attainments become eventually meaningless and purposeless. As explained in previous chapters, 
those who do not give proper attention to the inward life cannot enjoy worldly achievements. They 
may have everything wealth, home, family, power, position, and so forth but because of anxiety, 
apprehension, and restlessness, enjoyment is impossible. Little do people understand that prayer, 
meditation, contemplation, and other such practices are necessary for life in the world, apart from 
their intrinsic value. Of course, these practices are not specifically for the achievement of worldly 
goods, but the meditative person has the required inward qualities to enjoy the world. Those who 
forget God actually become victims of their own mental condition. Many also become mental 
patients. Being disturbed and agitated and not finding peace of mind, they go to pieces physically 
and mentally. So from a practical point of view, it is necessary to cultivate the inward life, the 
meditative life. We do not imply that everyone who claims to be a religious person is really 
religious. We only say that a man who practices true religion is mentally stable.  
There is often a dispute between the practical man and the spiritual man. The so-called practical 
man seems to think that unless something is useful it is meaningless. He has a sneering attitude 
toward the spiritual man and considers him a dreamer, while he looks upon the ideals as impractical 
and useless. Therefore, he thinks that the teachings of great religious leaders are obsolete in this 
scientific age. However, we know that the methods that are being adopted by these so-called 
practical personalities are leading them to individual and collective destruction. When they become 
practical, as they claim, they make themselves so restless and unhappy by accentuating their own 
desires and by intensifying the causes of their frustration that they ruin themselves. The so-called 
practical men and women are collectively leading us to a catastrophe. The idealists or religious 
persons are not, after all, so impractical when they advocate the cultivation of the inward life which 
brings peace of mind.  
What do we mean by an inward life, a prayerful life? We mean the life that is regulated by the 
thought of God, that is directed and governed by the spiritual ideal, by the realization and 
understanding of God. If that spirit is withdrawn, then the purpose of life is lost. Some may say that 
their purpose is to enjoy the world, whether God or anyone else created it. Others may argue: "God 
created this beautiful world for our enjoyment; otherwise, He could not have made it so attractive or 
given us the capacity for enjoying it." Although we do not oppose this idea of enjoyment, we want 
to make it clear that even if a person wants it he must have a peaceful state of mind. Unless God is 
the objective of life, an individual's desires will be intensified and he will be running constantly 
after the objects of his desires, thereby creating a state of increasing tension. If everyone becomes 
practically insane over the attainment of physical comforts, there will be an inevitable clash of 
personalities. This desire for objective enjoyment brings out the spirit of competition which leads to 
quarrel and strife in individual life, as well as in family, group, national, and international life. So, 
we suggest that people install God in their lives. This can be done effectively only with the practice 
of prayer and meditation. Otherwise, God will not remain the ideal, even with intellectual 
understanding or philosophical interpretation, because people will install themselves in His place. 
Time again well-meaning individuals have started religious life, but without the cultivation of that 
Life through prayer, contemplation, and meditation they have lost their purpose.  
L 

	  
116  
Whether a person has a sense of guilt or sin, whether he feels himself inadequate to cope with the 
problems of life, whether he is frustrated and disappointed, or whether he is seeking God for His 
own sake, he must have something to keep up the sustaining power in his life. Many who start a 
religious life get mixed up with the problems of the world. Herein lies the utility of prayer, 
meditation, and other such practices. Through spiritual practices a man can achieve what he wishes; 
that is the reason we say that a man attains power through prayer.  
This raises the question as to what a man expects of spiritual exercises. People will ask: "Where do 
you find a man who gets everything through prayer?" In the first place, it is not commonly 
understood that this is possible; beyond that it is necessary to know how to pray and to whom to 
pray. People fail to get what they want and then they complain: "Oh, we do not get anything 
through prayer." Little do they blame themselves. When they do not achieve what they want, they 
hold others responsible, even God. Do they stop to think that maybe they have not given any 
attention to God or have not approached Him for the solution of their problems? If they would think 
seriously, they would find that their failure is due to the lack of understanding of the technique of 
religious exercises.  
One must pray to God and to no one else. God is all-loving and omnipotent; He is the One who can 
give what is needed. There are some persons who pray to other beings. For instance, the spiritualists 
pray to departed souls and try to get what they want through them or from them. What can a 
departed soul give? The moment an ordinary person drops his body, he cannot have more than he 
already possesses. He is still ignorant of God, even if he was a great scientist or philosopher. All 
achievements are meaningless if one has not realized God. Ordinary departed souls at the utmost 
can give only what they themselves possess. Then how can they give peace if they did not have 
peace in life?  
Some people try to approach or pray to other subtle-bodied beings, such as Sri Krishna describes.180 
Those beings are also limited, whether they are in the Himalayas, the Alps, or the Rockies. Limited 
beings cannot give anything unlimited, such as peace and joy. The Infinite alone can give that 
abiding joy. That is the reason Sri Krishna says that a man can reach God through prayer to Him 
alone. If he prays to departed souls or other subtle-bodied beings he will go to their planes; but if he 
prays to God he will find Him.  
The next question concerns the method of spiritual practices. People often ask: "How should one 
pray?" Prayers fail and become meaningless when there is no contact with God. Some people pray 
in a mechanical sort of way, whether they are Hindus, Muslims, Jews, or Christians. They go 
through certain forms, utter the words, read from the books, but their minds are anywhere but in the 
thought of God. Consequently, there is no contact with Him. That is the reason Jesus said that vain 
repetitions practiced by unbelievers are meaningless.181 That which is mechanically repeated does 
not become effective. Therefore, the prayers are not answered and the people neither get what they 
wanted nor do they reach God. Prayer becomes effective from both the subjective and objective 
points of view namely, brings peace of mind and attainment of the object of prayer when the mind 
is concentrated on God. Prayer is a failure from these two points of view when a person does not 
have that concentration. So it is necessary to cultivate the spirit of communion with Him. When 
there is continual thought of God in prayer, the prayers will be answered. 
 There are, it is true, persons who pray for evil results. This is known as "black magic" in all the 
religious traditions. There are cases where a person of deep concentration can produce an evil effect 
in others and transfer his thoughts to others as well as control their minds. We knew a man who 
learned some of these practices through an expert teacher in India so that he could control the mind 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
180	  Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita IX: 23-25	  
181	  Matt. 6: 7. 	  

	  
117  
of his girl friend who was then living in England. Through this method he succeeded in winning the 
heart of the girl and they were married. Fortunately, both of these persons became interested in 
proper religious life. Unfortunately, most of those who give attention to "black magic," thought 
transference, or control of the minds of others, deteriorate and gradually lose their power of 
concentration and prayer. A note of warning is needed that no one should indulge in prayer for evil 
purposes. In fact, prayer or other religious exercises should be used only for the knowledge and 
love of God and for the good and happiness of humanity — the "neighbor."  
The third question concerns the object of prayer. For what should one pray? What is the nature of 
prayer? In this connection, we would like to clarify the four types of spiritual practices.  
The first type is used by the vast majority of the people in order to get what they want in the form of 
money, homes, families, children, health, power, position, name, fame, and even victory in war. 
This is regarded as the lowest form of prayer by spiritually developed personalities. Of course, these 
things can be attained provided the people have communion with God and intense thought of Him 
as well as emotional absorption in Him. There are many interesting stories in the religious history 
of the world concerning those who have received health, money, power, and so forth, because they 
gave their attention to God. Yet even if a man gets the material things he wants, they will create 
problems in life because they belong to the relative world and will not last long. Again, he will not 
really know God, and the finite things will not satisfy the Infinite within him.  
The second form of prayer or spiritual exercise is practiced for the attainment of higher qualities 
and the consequent integration of the total personality. For example, the devotees pray for purity, 
truthfulness, patience, endurance, and love; they do not give attention to power, position, and such. 
They say: "Oh God, give me devotion and strength so that I can think of You. Give me truthfulness, 
patience, and endurance so that I can live harmoniously and lovingly in the world. I realize that 
there are conflicting personalities, that there are disturbing conditions of life. Let me have strength, 
courage, tenacity, so that I can live under these conditions and realize the Truth." If we study the 
lives of the great spiritual personalities we find that all of them prayed in this way and all of them 
attained these good qualities. They had patience, forgiveness, love, and all the other glorious 
qualities that a man can achieve.  
The third kind of practice is deep concentration and meditation. In this practice a man does not pray 
for anything. His joy is in the thought of God. One may ask: "What does he gain thereby?" A man 
of that concentration and meditation gains everything that is to be gained in life. He who constantly 
communes with God and asks for nothing has knowledge of God. Even from the practical point of 
view we find that a man of such devotion, love, and communion, generally does not suffer from 
physical want. It is amazing that he does not pray for his physical requirements, yet he gets them 
somehow. That is the reason Jesus says: "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his 
righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you."182 Sri Ramakrishna also says: "Give up 
everything to Him, — resign yourself to Him and there will be no more trouble for you."183 "God is 
this wish-yielding tree; whoever says in His presence . . . Oh Lord! Thou hast given me everything 
he gets everything."184  
Again, Swami Brahmananda gives the advice: "Believe me, the Lord is always with you. If you 
practice a little, He will extend His helping hand to you."185 "Remain under the shelter of His lotus 
feet. He will do all that is needful; you have only to keep your mind fixed ever on Him."186 How 
true it is that when we study the lives of the devotees and saints, we find that they have had 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
182	  Matt. 7: 34.  
183	  Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna XIV: 321	  
184	  Ibid., II: 77.  
185	  Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 9.  
186	  Ibid., p. 124.  

	  
118  
everything they required. Some of them have also had a very comfortable life, even though they did 
not ask for it. God gave them what they needed; He knows the requirements of His devotees. He 
expresses His love to them as they give attention, love, and devotion to Him. People do not realize 
that He takes care of them. They think that they have to take care of themselves; then they make 
blunder after blunder and lose what they want to gain, because their vision, their understanding is 
confused. In their attempt to gain something, they forget that if they have patience and depend upon 
God, thinking about Him and meditating on Him constantly, they will find that He sup plies 
everything of His own accord. 
 This brings to mind an interesting story. There was a beggar who had traveled far and he was so 
tired that he could hardly walk. So he prayed: "Oh Rama, give me a horse." While he was thus 
praying wholeheartedly in an agonized state of mind, an English "Tommy" came along on 
horseback leading some other horses, among which was a young colt. The "Tommy" caught hold of 
the poor beggar and asked him to carry the little colt. Then the beggar cried out: "Oh, Rama, you 
misunderstood me! Instead of getting a horse to carry me, I have to carry this colt!" This happens in 
life. People ask for things which become a burden to them. They want power and position, and the 
power and position destroy their peace and become a serious burden to them. He who is in constant 
communion with God through meditation on Him with love and devotion is the wisest of all.  
Through deep concentration and meditation a person gains tremendous power of mind. Most people 
do not actually understand what is meant by the practice of concentration and meditation and 
intense thought of God. This requires considerable clarification, as they are not in the habit of 
thinking of God, even though they may have noble thoughts or poetic and philosophical flights of 
imagination. In the actual practice of concentration and meditation, a person is to sit in a 
comfortable but erect posture so that his neuromuscular system may be relaxed.187 That is the reason 
many aspirants perform certain types of breathing exercises, described in Chapter I. It has been 
found that postures which relax the neuromuscular system are conducive to mental relaxation. One 
should sit erect in a comfortable position and try to drop the tension of the muscles caused by 
rigidity of the nervous system. If one sits erect and gently takes long breaths and exhales gently, 
keeping the rhythm of inhalation and exhalation at the same tempo, the body relaxes. We warn 
people in this connection that they must not take what the Hindus call rigorous pranayama 
exercises without proper guidance from a teacher who knows the system of the exercises as well as 
the requirements of the individual student. This simple exercise along with artificial yawning a few 
times immensely helps to relax the neuromuscular system for the time being. After relaxing, the 
mind should be focused on an aspect of God that is suitable to the particular individual. In other 
words, he must try to focus his mind on a personal aspect of God that he loves and adores. In order 
to have deep concentration on God, there must be an emotional relationship. When one person loves 
another, his mind naturally goes to him. Similarly, when there is appreciation and adoration of God, 
a person has a certain amount of love for Him. It is true that the type of love which we have 
discussed cannot be attained immediately. So the spiritual aspirant has to take an aspect of God 
which appeals to him.  Then he must try to focus his mind on the luminous and blissful form of that 
divine personality without thinking of anything else. It is not necessary to think of attributes and 
qualities simultaneously. What happens is that when the aspirant tries to visualize that blissful form 
of his beloved Lord, he spontaneously manifests those qualities. In the life of St. Francis of Assisi 
in the Christian tradition, and of other spiritual personalities in Hindu, Jewish, and Mohammedan 
traditions, we find that even the physical nature of the person who meditates is changed because of 
the intense thought of the Beloved. During the life of Sri Ramakrishna in modern India his physical 
constitution would go through a radical change as he performed different types of spiritual 
practices. The stigmata and such other evidences in the physical constitution of mystics or devotees 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
187	  "Raja Yoga," Works, I. See also Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali. 	  

	  
119  
convince us that the human physical structure can undergo a change according to the intensity of 
thought. In his everyday life a person can observe that when he experiences anger or any other 
violent emotion there is a change in the whole neuromuscular system. Similarly, when he has 
loving thoughts for his parents, children, or beloved, his body becomes relaxed.188 This common 
experience also justifies our conclusion that when a person thinks intensely of the Beloved, God, 
his neuromuscular system becomes quiet and his bodily functions become rhythmical. When great 
spiritual personalities had the highest type of spiritual realization, such as Samadhi (super-
consciousness), they were radically changed at that time and the effect remained with them.  
In case a person does not find it convenient to think of any personality of God with name and form, 
such as Jesus, Buddha, Krishna, and others, he can take a symbol of God signifying universal divine 
qualities, such as light, and focus the mind on that. It has been found that rationalistic scientific 
thinkers can hardly think of a traditional aspect of God. The so-called pantheistic philosophers also 
find it difficult to use a personality as an object of concentration. However, they can meditate on 
any symbol that represents Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute.189  
There are some auxiliary methods that can be used in the practice of concentration. It is true that the 
mind is extremely flighty and changeable. The majority can hardly focus the mind on one object for 
more than a few seconds, as they are in the habit of thinking successive thoughts and going through 
successive experiences and consciousnesses. So it is but natural that they find it difficult to 
concentrate on one thing intensely for a little while. That is the reason scriptural study, worship, 
singing of hymns, and the repetition of the name of God are extremely helpful for the preparation of 
deep concentration and ultimately of meditation.190  
In Hindu-Buddhist tradition and in certain Christian and Mohammedan traditions the devotees are 
advised to repeat a particular name of God. A technical name of God (a mantra) representing a 
particular divine aspect, is used extensively for higher spiritual evolution. When a man repeats a 
mantra, his mind is attracted to that form of God which the name represents. He is also advised by 
his teacher that when he repeats it he should try to visualize that particular form and gradually have 
meditation on that aspect of God. During His lifetime, Sri Ramakrishna often discussed this practice 
with His disciples. "By Japam," He said "by repeating His name with a concentrated mind, you can 
have His vision, you can realize Him."191 Swami Brahmananda, one of His foremost disciples, also 
used to say:  
The practice of Japam [repetition of the name of God] is specially suited to our present iron age 
(Kali Yoga). There is no other spiritual practice easier than this. But meditation must accompany 
the repetition of the Mantra.192  
It ought to be noted here that as the mind is so restless it will take time for any aspirant to develop 
the power of concentration. So one should not be discouraged when he finds it difficult to practice. 
As Sri Krishna says in the Bhagavad-Gita, through constant practice one can overcome the 
fickleness of mind.193  
An aspirant should remember that even though he may not seem to be making progress in the 
practice of concentration the very struggle will gradually straighten the mind. 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
188	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology, chap. VI, "Meditation." 	  
189	  Sankaracharya, Vivekachudamani. See also "Jnana Yoga," Works, II	  
190	  "Bhakti Yoga," Works, III. 	  
191	  Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna (and ed.; Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math), II, 349-350. 	  
192	  Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 18. 	  
193	  Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita VI:35.  
	  

	  
120  
 The next point to be considered is the regularity in practice. A person should sit for concentration 
every day regularly in the morning and evening at a particular period of time. The beginners may 
start with ten minute periods and gradually increase the duration. In the practice of this form of 
prayer one must not be impatient. If he steadily practices for a few months regardless of the degree 
of progress he is bound to grow.  
Concentration is regarded as the first stage of meditation. When the mind is wholly absorbed 
without any wavering, it is regarded as meditation. Some Christian mystics, however, use the word 
"contemplation." There is no basic difference between these words. It is a question only of quality. 
Most people do not realize the extent of the power latent in the human mind. All the cherished 
material objects can be manipulated by the mind. In Patanjali's Raja Yoga, it is explained that there 
are persons who can concentrate their minds on subtle particles of matter. When their minds remain 
absorbed in those subtle particles, they understand the laws of nature directly and immediately and 
they can control nature. Grosser expressions like heat, cold, rain, and so forth, can also be 
controlled by their mental power. There have been many authentic incidents of suspension of 
animation, and control of the burning power of fire.194 Patanjali enumerates the actual methods of 
attaining control over the laws of physical nature. The Raja Yogis and Hatha Yogis in India 
demonstrate this power, without the least shade of doubt.  
However, our interest is to have the knowledge of God through concentration and meditation. When 
the mind becomes quiet, when the waves of the mind subside through this practice, then the Truth 
reveals Itself. Hindu psychologists compare the mind to the surface of a lake. When the wind blows, 
the water is full of waves and ripples. In the same way, when the passions and desires of man are 
active, the mind is agitated. When the mind becomes quiet through spiritual practices, then alone 
does a man know the Truth that is inherent in his own nature, just as we can see the reflection of our 
face in the quiet lake when the waves subside. According to Patanjali: "At that time (the time of 
concentration) the seer (Purusha) rests in his own (unmodified) state."195 Swami Vivekananda 
explains this in his commentary: "As soon as the waves have stopped, and the lake has become 
quiet, we see its bottom. So with the mind; when it is calm, we see what our own nature is; we do 
not mix ourselves 'but remain our own selves."196  
Another glorious effect of this third kind of prayer is that through steady practice of meditation, a 
person can become inseparably connected with Him. Intense love is developed for Him and His 
love goes to the devotee. Sri Ramakrishna used to say that intense love for God binds Him to the 
devotee.197 This means that whenever a devotee wants God to reveal Himself with intense love, God 
through infinite love and grace grants that desire of a devotee. This is hard for an ordinary person to 
comprehend, but the real devotees like St. Teresa of Avila, St. Anthony of Padua, or St. Catherine 
of Siena could see God whenever they wished. Do we not read in the biography of Sri 
Ramakrishna, who lived in India during the nineteenth century, that He could see God at any time 
He wished. We had the privilege of sitting at the feet of most of His disciples and hearing this from 
them. We do not doubt it, because their lives also proved to us that they were men and women with 
experience of God. They also used to tell us that the problems of life would be solved by the 
practice of concentration and meditation, that God could be bound to the devotee provided he had 
intense love for Him. One of the saints of India, Mirabai, who composed many hymns said: "You 
can do everything else but unless you have that intense love for God you cannot have Him." So we 
see that prayer or contemplation or meditation has tremendous power; we can reach God through 
these practices. Could we want anything better?  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
194	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology, chap. IX, "Extrasensory Experiences”  
195	  19 Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali I: 3.  
196	  "Raja Yoga," Works, I, 803.  
197	  Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna XXV: 528.  
	  

	  
121  
A question may arise here about the place of the grace of God in spiritual realization. Does the 
devotee have to do everything himself to attain his answer to prayer for things and divine revelation 
or experiences, or is the grace of God active too? Our answer is that grace has an important place in 
spiritual experiences of various types. As the personalist philosophers like Professor Edgar S. 
Brightman would say, there is cooperation between God and man. Our idea is that the grace of God 
can be attained only when the devotee remains in a receptive mood by purifying his mind through 
the practice of prayer, concentration, and meditation and by making his mind one-pointed in 
directing it to God. Then alone he feels the grace of God and His presence. As Sri Ramakrishna 
used to say:– 
 The wind of God's grace is incessantly blowing. Lazy sailors on this sea of life do not take 
advantage of it. But the active and the strong always keep their minds unfurled to catch the 
friendly breeze, and thus reach their destination very soon.198  
The fourth type of prayer is the highest, as Swami Brahmananda says.199 It can be practiced by few 
people in this world. This type of communion with God is Samadhi, super-conscious experience. In 
this state a man is face to face with God. This is also prayer, because in that state there is constant 
thought of, or absorption in, God. Perhaps some would not call that prayer; they would rather 
consider it the fulfillment of prayer. We find that the person who is established in the highest 
communion likes to continue with it. So it is regarded by some of the greatest mystics such as 
Swami Brahmananda and Swami Vivekananda, as the supreme type of prayer or worship.  
When a man has achieved that state there is nothing more to be achieved, nothing more to be 
known. That is the reason we say that the greatest power that a man can have is gained through 
prayer. Although the fourth type of prayer cannot be practiced by many persons at once, the third 
type can be practiced more or less by everyone. Even if one is functioning on the physical plane and 
wants physical comforts or power and position, he can start with the elementary or first type of 
prayer. We have seen men and women change radically, using prayers to get something from God. 
St. Paul's life is a dramatic illustration. This may seem anomalous because he felt hateful towards 
Christ and His followers. However, although he hated Christ he thought of Him constantly because 
of his intense feeling. Whether a person touches fire deliberately or accidentally he is burned. The 
life of St. Paul was affected by his constant thought of Christ, even though he felt hatred rather than 
love and admiration. Similarly, St. Augustine was transformed through prayer from an ignoble 
person to a great pillar of Christianity.  
There was a little boy in India who was banished with his mother from the kingdom of his father. 
Even though he was only eight or nine years old, he began to pray for the restoration of the 
kingdom. He prayed so intensely that eventually God revealed Himself to the boy. Then he no 
longer wanted the kingdom; his only desire was for the love of God. In religious history there have 
been many persons who started their spiritual life desiring things of the world; yet even though they 
wanted money, power, position, and so forth, they thought of God and were changed. It is the 
intense thought of God which is important. This changes a man's inner nature and he gradually 
evolves from the lower to the higher types of prayer. The more one thinks of Him with deep 
concentration, the more his inner nature changes.  
Some of the modern psychologists are interested to know the method of removing mental and 
physical fatigue. Many physicians practicing psychosomatic medicine are anxious to remove mental 
and physical tension. Many of the therapists, like Dr. Joseph Pratt of Boston and others, are giving 
exercises to their patients so that the neuromuscular system may be relaxed and functional disorders 
such as stomach trouble, certain forms of heart ailments, hypertension, and others may be 
eliminated. Many clinical psychologists and other therapists wonder how the practice of 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
198	  Ibid., xxvi: 538 	  
199	  Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 12. 	  

	  
122  
concentration and meditation — the third form of prayer — can be helpful in conserving mental and 
physical energy and removing mental fatigue and tension.  
Our answer to them is that when an individual is to pray or meditate he is generally asked to go 
through some preliminary processes which are absolutely necessary for the proper practice of 
prayer. These processes lead to the relaxation of the neuromuscular system. Patanjali, Swami 
Vivekananda, and others state that unless the body is in fairly good condition the mind cannot  
function properly. The nerve centers should be free for their functioning and the whole nervous 
system must be relaxed. Therefore, they prescribe certain postures and breathing exercises.200 The 
idea is that, generally speaking, the ordinary mind functions through the nervous system. As a rule, 
when the mind is peaceful and restful, the nervous system is also the same. Unfortunately, most 
people are not mentally relaxed and are full of tension and frustration. Consequently, the 
neuromuscular system is tense.  
Thus preliminary steps for proper posture and certain forms of respiratory regulation are helpful in 
the preparation for a real prayerful attitude of mind and for the conservation of mental and nerve 
energy. When a man knows how to relax and practice concentration and meditation he generates 
tremendous mental energy and strengthens his whole nervous system. In our personal observations 
we have found that the best way to remove fatigue is to practice systematically mental and physical 
relaxation and spiritual exercises. When a person is tired, even after sleep, if he tries to do his 
spiritual practices of concentration and meditation and repetition of the name of God his fatigue is 
overcome. Moreover, he becomes fit for the continuation of his concentration. The mind becomes 
free from tension and frustration for the time being, making it possible to concentrate on one aspect 
of God. It has also been found that a man can be efficient in his activities if he systematically 
performs his spiritual exercises without getting too much sleep and at the same time without being 
fatigued. Moreover, he can do better work and remain efficient and alert in every sense of the term. 
Apart from that, his main objective of life — namely, spiritual unfoldment — becomes attainable.  
Beginners, distracted clients, and students do indeed find it difficult to go through religious 
exercises themselves. That is the reason they need a sympathetic and loving guide or teacher to help 
them. It is the duty of the teacher to watch over the distracted or disorganized student with 
sympathy and guide him gradually, step by step, from the beginning of relaxation exercises to deep 
concentration. In the first place, a student should be given practices of artificial relaxation side by 
side with a simple method of concentration on one aspect of God, even though this simple practice 
may be difficult for the time being. The student should be encouraged constantly to go ahead with 
his practices and he should be watched so that he will remain regular in them, no matter how 
imperfect they may be. Regularity of practice is important for real stabilization of mind and body.  
When the student is a little established, he should be given the more important practice of 
concentration, gradually leading him to meditation. It is the imperative duty of the teacher to 
encourage the student in spite of his difficulties and limitations. We have seen in many instances 
that such encouragement from the teacher immensely helped the student in his emotional 
integration and development of will power. The moment the teacher becomes impatient he not only 
defeats his own purpose of helping the student but he does immense harm to him. Once the student 
is discouraged and becomes unstable in spiritual practices it requires a great deal of new effort for 
him to become again stabilized, as the mind of the average person is constantly seeking excuses to 
be irregular. Swami Brahmananda used to tell his disciples that the mind is like a child seeking its 
own excuses for instability and irregularity. He also said:  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
200	  Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali II: 46-55. 	  

	  
123  
The mind is just like a milch cow which gives a larger supply when fed well. Give the mind more 
food and you will find it giving you better service in return. And what constitutes the food of the 
'mind? Meditation and concentration, prayer and worship, and all such practices.201  
When a man gradually becomes established in the thought of God, his neuromuscular system 
automatically is relaxed. Consequently, he conserves both physical and mental energy. It is known 
from practical experience that a man of concentration generates mental and physical energy within 
himself, as a result of this practice. After the practice of concentration the feeling of fatigue 
vanishes and a man feels invigorated. The psychologists and therapists who want to eliminate 
mental and physical fatigue and establish harmony of mind should particularly emphasize not only 
relaxation exercises but also the practice of concentration and meditation, as this restores mental 
energy and thereby eliminates functional disturbances.  
The practice of concentration and meditation also stabilizes the emotions and develops will 
power.202 Therefore, even if a person is not inspired by the highest ideal, and even if he is only 
motivated by the practical aspects for the time being, he should devote considerable time to the 
third form of spiritual exercises. These practices can have a tremendous effect on all the various 
functions of man and thereby stabilize and integrate his whole personality. 
  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
201	  Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda, p. 145.  
202	  Swami Akhilananda, Hindu Psychology, chap. V, "Will and Personality."  
	  

	  
124  
Bibliography 
BOOKS 
ADLER, ALFRED. The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology. Translated by P. Radin. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1932.  
ALEXANDER, FRANZ. Conflicts of Power in Modern Culture. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1947. . 
Fundamentals of Psychoanalysis. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1950.  
ALEXANDER, FRANZ, AND FRENCH, THOMAS MORTON. Studies in Psychosomatic Medicine. New 
York: The Ronald Press Co., 1948.  
ALLPORT, GORDON W. The Individual and His Religion. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1950. . 
Personality, A Psychological Interpretation. New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1937.  
AKHILANANDA, SWAMI. Hindu Psychology. New York: Harper 8c Brothers, 1946. Hindu View of 
Christ. New York: Philosophical Library, 1949*  
BARTH, KARL. This Christian Cause. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1941. BAUMANN, JULIUS. The 
Character of Jesus. 1908.  
BERTOCCI, PETER A. The Human Adventure in Sex, Love, and Marriage. New York: Association Press, 
1949. Bhagavatam.  
BINET-SANGLE, CHARLES. The Insanity of Jesus, ycd ed., Vols. I, II; ist ed., Vols. Ill, IV. Paris, 1911-
1915.  
BINGER, CARL. The Doctor's Job. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1947BRIGHTMAN, EDGAR 
SHEFFIELD. Nature and Values. New York: Abingdon Cokesbury Press, 1945. . A Philosophy of Religion. 
New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1940. . The Spiritual Life. New York: Abingdon-Cokesbury Press, 1942. 
BROWN, WILLIAM. Science and Personality. London: Oxford University Press, 1929.  
 COMPLETE LECTURES OF COL. R. G. INGERSOLL. Chicago: J. Regan & Co. COMPLETE WORKS 
OF SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, THE. Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama. Vols. I-VII.  
DEWEY, JOHN. Problems of Men. New York: Philosophical Library, 11,46. Mental Health and Hindu 
Psychology Dhammapada. Translated by Max Miiller. Vol. X, Sacred Books of the East. London: Oxford 
University Press, 1924.  
FREUD, SIGMUND. Beyond the Pleasure Principle. London: International Psychoanalytic Press, 1922. . 
Totem and Taboo. London: George Routledge & Sons, Ltd. Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, The. Translated by 
Swami Nikhilananda. New York: Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Center, 1942. Also, Gospel of Sri 
Ramakrishna. 2 vols. Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1930. Also, The Gospel of Ramakrishna. 
Revised by Swami Abhed ananda. New York: The Vedanta Society, 1947.  
 HAGGARD, H/W. AND JELLINEK, E. M. Alcohol Explored. New York: Doubleday Doran & Co., Inc., 
1942.  
HILTNER, SEWARD. Pastoral Counseling. New York: Abingdon-Cokesbury Press, 1949.  
HIRSCH, WILLIAM. Conclusions of a Psychiatrist. New York: 1912. HOLTZMANN, H. J. The Messianic 
Consciousness of Jesus. 1907.  
HOLTZMANN, OSKAR. Was Jesus an Ecstatic? 1903.  
HORNBY, KAREN. Our Inner Conflicts. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1945. . Self -Analysis. 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1942.  
JAMES, WILLIAM. The Varieties of Religious Experience. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1911.  
 JANET, P. Major Symptoms of Hysteria. 2nd ed. New York: The Mac millan Co., 1920. JONES, 
HOWARD MUMFORD. Education and World Tragedy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1946.  
JUNG, CARL G. Modern Man in Search of a Soul. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1934. . 
Psychology and Religion. London: Oxford University Press, 1938. KEMPIS, THOMAS A. The Following of 
Christ. New York: Catholic Publishing Co. 
KIERKEGAARD ANTHOLOGY, A. Edited by Robert BretalL Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1947.  
KINSEY, ALFRED C., POMEROY, MARDELL B., AND MARTIN, CLYDE E. Sexual Behavior in the 
Human Male. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1948. KLEIN, D. B. Mental Hygiene. New York: Henry 
Holt 8c Co., 1944.  
KUNKEL, FRITZ. In Search of Maturity. New York: Charles Soribner's Sons, 1943. LANDIS, C. AND 
PAGE, J. D. Modern Society and Mental Disease. New York: Farrar & Rinehart, Inc., 1938.  

	  
125  
LEUBA, JAMES H. God or Man? London: C. A. Watts & Co., 1933. . The Psychology of Religious 
Mysticism. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1935. LEVINE, ALBERT J. Current Psychologies. 
Cambridge: Sci-Art Publishers, ^940. Bibliography SSS  
LOOSTEN, GEORGE DE (Dr. George Lomer). Jesus Christ from the Stand point of Psychiatry. Bamberg, 
1905.  
MANN, MARTY. Primer on Alcoholism. New York: Rinehart & Co., Inc,  
MAYO, ELTON. The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1933. 
- . The Social Problems of an Industrial Civilization. Boston: Division of Research, Graduate School of 
Business Administration, Harvard University, 1945.  
MENNINGER, KARL A. Love Against Hate. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1944. - . Man Against 
Himself. New York: Harcourt, Brace Co., Inc., 1938. McDoucALL, WILLIAM. Outline of Abnormal 
Psychology. London: Methuen & Co., Ltd., 1926. - . Social Psychology. London: Methuen & Co., Ltd., 
1918. MONTAGU, ASHLEY. On Being Human. New York: Henry Schuman, 1950. New Testament. Holy 
Bible. Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Romans.  
NIEBUHR, REINHOLD. Christianity and Power Politics. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1940. 
NORTHROP, F. S. C. The Meeting of East and West. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1946.  
PEABODY, RICHARD R. The Common Sense of Drinking. Boston: Little, Brown, 8c Co., 1931.  
PRATT, JAMES BISSETT. The Religious Consciousness. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1945.  
RASMUSSEN, EMIL. Jesus, A Comparative Study in Psych opathology. Leipzig, 1905.  
ROGERS, CARL R. Counseling and Psychotherapy. Boston: Hough ton Mifflin Co., 1942.  
RONALDSHAY, EARL OF. The Heart of Aryavarta. London: Constable & Co., Ltd., 1985. Saddharma 
Pundarika. Sayings of Sri Ramakrishna. 3rd ed. Mylapore, Madras: The Rama krishna Math, 1925.  
SCHRODINGER, ERwiN. What Is Life? New York: The Macmillan Co., 1947SCHWEITZER, ALBERT. 
Indian Thought and Its Development. London: Hodder & Stoughton Ltd., 1936.  
SOROKIN, PITIRIM A. The Crisis of Our -Age. New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1944. - . The 
Reconstruction of Humanity. Boston: Beacon Press, 1948. Spiritual Teachings of Swami Brahmananda. 2nd 
ed. Mylapore, Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1933. Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. Translated by Swami 
Swarupananda. 5th ed. Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas: Advaita Ashrama, 1933. M4 Mental Health and 
Hindu Psychology  
STEERE, DOUGLAS V. On Beginning from Within. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1943.  
STRAUSS, DAVID FRIEDRICH. The Life of Jesus Revised for the German People. 1865.  
SANKARACHARYA. Vivekachudamani.  
TEMPLE, WILLIAM. Mens Creatrix. London: Macmillan 8c Co., Ltd.,  
TERHUNE, WILLIAM B. Religion and Psychiatry. Publication Number 6. New Canaan: Silver Hill 
Foundation for the Treatment of the Psychoneuroses, 1948. UNWIN, J. D. Sex and Culture. London: 
Humphrey Milford, 1934. Upanishads. Chhandogya Upanishad; Isha Upanishad; Katha Upan ishad; Taittirya 
Upanishad; Vrihadaranayokopanishad. Uttaradhyayana.  
WARREN, HENRY CLARKE. Buddhism in Translation. Vol. Ill, Harvard Oriental Series. Cambridge: 
Harvard University, 1896.  
WATSON, JOHN B. Behaviorism. New York: The People's Institute Publishing Co., Inc., 1924.  
WHITE, ROBERT W. The Abnormal Personality. New York: The Ronald Press Co., 1948.  
WOLF AND WOLFE. Human Gastric Function. New York: Oxford University Press, 1943. Yoga 
Aphorisms of Patanjali.  
ZILBOORG, GREGORY. A History of Medical Psychology. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1941.  
 
ARTICLES 
MOWRER, O. HoBART. 1 "Biological vs. Moral 'Frustration' in Personality Disturbances," Progressive 
Education, January, 1949. "Learning Theory and the Neurotic Paradox” The American Journal of Orthopsy 
Matry, Vol. XVIII, No. 4, October, 1948. - Neurosis and Its Treatment. Chicago: The Delphinian Society, 
1949. (Reprinted from Patterns for Modern Living, Division I, "Psychological Patterns.") Science News 
Letter. May 12, 1951.  
SMITH, JAMES J. "A Medical Approach to Problem Drinking. Preliminary Report," Quarterly Journal of 
Studies on Alcohol. September, 1949  

	  
126  
WALL, JAMES H. "Psychotherapy of Alcohol Addiction in a Private Mental Hospital," Quarterly Journal of 
Studies on Alcohol. March, 1945 
WERNER, HERMAN. "The Historical Jesus of Liberal Theology, A Psychotic," The New Ecclesiastical 
Journal, XXII (1911).  
WING, EUHU S. "Diversion, Relaxation and Sleep," The Rhode Island Medical Journal, XXII (May, 1939). 
1 Articles by Dr. Mowrer are to form part of a book. Bibliography $5  
ZILBOORG, GREGORY. "The Sense of Guilt and Reality," Digest of Neurology and Psychiatry, XVIII 
(April, 1950).  
UNPUBLISHED MATERIAL  
BURLINGAME, C. CHARLES. "What the Physician can expect from Psychiatry." Paper read at the igth 
Scientific Assembly of the Medical Society of the District of Columbia, Washington, September 28, 1948.  
FARNSWORTH, DANA L. "The Role of Psychiatry in Colleges and Universities." Group for the 
Advancement of Psychiatry. (Report to be published.)  
MOWRER, O. HOBART. "The Problem of Anxiety Some Conceptual Difficulties." (Mimeographed.) 
"Psychiatric Social Work in the Psychiatric Clinic." Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry, Committee 
on Psychiatric Social Work, June 12, 1950. (Typewritten.)  
WRIGHT, DAVID G. "Some Psychiatric Considerations in the Schizophrenias." Paper read at the Annual 
Meeting of the New England Society of Psychiatry, April 20, 1950, at the Institute of Living, Hartford, 
Connecticut.