# psy601-final-book
# source PDF: raw/psy601-final-book.pdf | pages: 183 | ~73460 words

COURSE 09: COUNSELLING: PROCESS AND SKILLS 
Authors: Dr. Atul Kumar and Dr. Rasna Sehrawat 
Unit 1 : Counselling: Nature and Goals 01 
Unit 2 : Basic Counselling Skills                                                                                                74 
Unit 3 : Specific Counselling Skills 92 
Unit 4 : Models of Counselling Skills  125 
 
Yashwantrao 
Chavan 
Maharashtra  
Open 
University 
PSY601 
COUNSELLING: PROCESS AND 
SKILLS 
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University, Nashik 
Vice-Chancellor: Prof. Sanjeev Sonawane 
Director: Nagarjun Wadekar, School of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Humanities and Social Sciences School Council 
Nagarjun Wadekar (Chairman) 
Director,  
School of Humanities and Social Sciences  
Y .C.M. Open University, Nashik 
Prof. Jaideep Nikam 
Director and Senior Professor. 
School of Continuing Education,  
Y .C.M. Open University, Nashik 
Prof. Shivaji Sargar 
Director,  
Distance and Online Education Centre,  
 University of Mumbai, Vidyanagari, Kalina, 
Mumbai 
Prof. Prakash Pawar 
Head, Department of Political Science, 
Shivaji University, Vidyanagar, Kolhapur 
Prof. Rajendra Kumbhar (Retired) 
Former Head, Department of Library and 
Informatics, 
Savitribai Phule Pune University,  
Ganeshkhind Road, Pune 
Prof. Sanjay Tambat 
Dean, School of Interdisciplinary Studies, 
Savitribai Phule Pune University,  
Ganeshkhind Road, Pune 
Prof. Sandeep Chaudhary 
Head, Department of Sociology,  
 Saraswati Bhuvan College, Saraswati Colony, 
Aurangpura, Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar 
Prof. Sudhir Bhatkar 
Director, School of Media Studies, 
Kavaytri Bahinabai Chaudhary North 
Maharashtra University, Umvinagar, Jalgaon 
Prof. Chetana Kamalaskar  
Director, Faculty of Science,  
Y .C.M. Open University, Nashik 
Dr. Latika Gaikwad  
Associate Professor,  
Faculty of Commerce and Management,  
Y .C.M. Open University, Nashik 
Dr. Subhash Sonune  
Assistant Professor  
Faculty of Education,  
Y .C.M. Open University, Nashik 
PSY601: COUNSELLING: PROCESS AND SKILLS 
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University, Nashik 
Vice-Chancellor: Prof. Sanjeev Sonawane 
Director: Nagarjun Wadekar, School of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Authors                                                                                    
Dr. Atul Kumar 
Assistant Professor, 
Amity Institute of Behavioural Health and Allied 
Sciences, Amity University, Noida (UP)  
Dr. Rasna Sehrawat, 
Assistant Professor, 
Amity Institute of Behavioral Health & Allied 
Science, Amity University, Noida (UP) 
 
Instructional Technology Editing & Program Coordinator 
 
Pramod Dattatray Wagh 
Academic Coordinator (Assistant Professor Level) 
School of Humanities and Social Sciences, 
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University, 
Nashik – 422 222  
Production      
Vilas Badhan 
Manage (I/C), Print Production Centre, YCMOU, Nashik 
©2025, Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University, Nashik 
First Publication: June 2025    
 Publication Number: 
Cover Page : Dhammaratna Jawale 
Formatting and Design: 
Publisher: Dilip Bharad, Registrar, Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University, Nashik 422 222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vice Chancellor’s Message 
 
Dear Students, 
     I heartily congratulate you for your admission for Postgraduate (MA) Program in Psychology at 
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University. 
             Since last thirty -five years, the university has tried to fulfil the educational needs of the  
students of the state by providing skill -based education programs as per the needs of the society. The 
university has always tried to impart knowledge to the students on how to apply their learning in daily 
life for the benefit of themselves and the society, instead of focusing only on traditional education and 
text-based knowledge. This has created an opportunity for students, who have had dropped out from 
education for any reason, to come into the mainstream of higher education. The flexible nature of the 
education program, such as extended time to complete the education program, minimum tuition fees 
and student -cantered methodology, etc. are the features of the open education system. While 
democratizing the opportunity of education, the university has brought many students into the 
mainstream of education who could not afford education due to economic disadvantage. 
As per the guidelines  of the government and the University Grants Commission, similarly as 
per the feedback received from various institutions and organizations, and keeping in mind the 
changing needs of the times, new educational programs are developed by the university. Quality books 
of various educational programs developed by experts in the respective field are made available to the 
students free of cost. I am proud that these books developed by the Open University have become the 
identity of the university. In this way, the Open University has contributed to the development of the 
state by creating an education system that brings the knowledge to every household. 
Psychology has been developing as a discipline since the 18th century. Almost all major 
universities around the world now teach it as a separate subject. I am pleased that the Open University 
is now offering this subject for study throughout Maharashtra.  
According to the changing nature of the state governance, now the state is no longer just a 
system that looks after law and order but has become a system that provides overall welfare to the 
people. In modern times, there is a need to study changing political processes, constitutional and 
democratic values, world affairs and changing trends.  
Psychology is a subject of interest to everyone, from students preparing for various jobs in the 
field of psychology field. This curriculum has been meticulously designed to cater to a diverse group 
of learners, including aspiring psychologists, counsellors, and professionals looking to sharpen their 
skills. The curriculum emphasizes both foundational knowledge and modern practices. Specific 
emphasis has been given to innovative psychological practices, such as counselling psychologists, 
school psychologists, and counsellors; these days the students of the psychology stream are achieving 
success as psychologists, Researcher, counsellors, and wellness coaches. 
In the traditional education system, regular classes are conducted in colleges every day, while 
in the distance education system, counselling sessions are organized on holidays. This concept expects 
students to complete their education while performing their professional duties and family 
responsibilities. While going to the counselling session, it is necessary to go through the relevant 
syllabus, books, and its components. So, that it becomes easier to clear doubts. The university believes 
that the ideal counselling session should be a discussion rather than a monotonous lecture. The 
university has made available various interviews and lectures of experts on university’s website; you 
must take benefit of the same. In today's era of information technology, emphasis is being placed on 
paperless administration using digital technology in administration. As a part of this, the university's 
various academic courses have been made available in digital format on the website www.ycmou.ac.in  
I am sure that that will be useful to students, teachers and general readers. Your feedback on these 
courses and reading material would be most welcome. 
I am confident that this program will empower our learners to become skilled professionals 
who would contribute meaningfull y to the Psychology sector . I extend my best wishes to all the 
learners embarking on this academic journey and look forward to witnessing their success in the field 
of Psychology. 
With best compliments! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE STRUCTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The field of psychology known as counselling psychology entails both theoretical and practical study 
in a  number of major areas, including counselling process and outcome, supervision and training, 
career development and counselling, and prevention and health. Focusing on assets and strengths, 
person environment interactions, educational and professional growth, brief connections, and intact 
personalities are some common themes among counselling psychologists. 
Depending on the services they offer and clientele they serve, counselling psychologists work in a 
variety of locations. Some work as teachers, managers, researchers, and service providers in colleges 
and universities. Others work in independent practice, offering services to individuals, 
couples/families, groups, and organizations in the areas of counselling, psychotherapy, evaluation, and 
consultancy. 
This book, Counselling Process and Skills, is written with the distance learning student in mind. It 
is presented in a user-friendly format using a clear, lucid language. Each unit contains an Introduction 
and a list of Objectives to prepare the student for what to expect in the text. At the end of each unit are 
a Summary and a list of Key Words, to aid in recollection of concepts learnt. All units contain Self -
Assessment Questions and Exercises, and strategically placed Check Your Progress questions so the 
student can keep track of what has been discussed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Objective 
1. To analyze theories of sensory transmission and evaluate their implications for human 
adaptation and cognitive functioning. 
2. To examine the neural basis of attention and assess factors influencing its role in everyday 
cognitive tasks and related disorders. 
3. To investigate cognitive mechanisms underlying thinking and language, with emphasis on 
theories, decision-making, and problem-solving processes. 
4. To critically evaluate memory functions, models, and disorders, and apply cognitive principles 
to real-life contexts and problem-solving situations. 
 
Course Outcome 
 
1. Students will be able to define counselling and explain its processes, different approaches 
(e.g., psychodynamic, behavioural, humanistic), and its application in the Indian context.  
2. Students will demonstrate the ability to use various counselling techniques (e.g., active 
listening, questioning, feedback), and skills (e.g., inside -outside, micro, macro, and self -
monitoring) effectively in mock counselling sessions.  
3. Students will compare traditional and modern models of counselling, including indigenous 
frameworks specific to Indian socio-cultural settings.  
4. Students will assess the development and importance of the working alliance and demonstrate 
strategies for effective closure or termination of the counselling process. 
 
1 
 
UNIT 1 COUNSELLING: NATURE AND GOALS 
 1.1 Objectives 
 1.2 Introduction 
 1.3 Defining Counselling 
 1.3.1 Characteristics of Counselling 
 1.3.2 Evolution of Counselling 
 1.4 Counselling Process: Development of Counsellor-Counselee Relationship 
 1.4.1 Initial Session  
 1.4.2 Termination  
 1.4.3 Stages of the Counselling Process 
 1.5 Role of Counsellors 
 1.6 Approaches to Counselling and Helping 
 1.6.1 Psychodynamic Counselling 
 1.6.2 Humanistic Counselling 
 1.6.3 Transactional Analysis 
 1.6.4 Behavioural Counselling 
 1.6.5 Cognitive Theories 
 1.7 Helping Relationship and Helping Process 
 1.7.1 Definition of Helping 
 1.7.2 Stages of Helping 
 1.7.3 Helping as a Skill 
 1.8 Counsellor Goal-Setting Process 
 1.8.1 Limitations of Goals 
 1.9 Counselling in India 
 1.10 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions 
 1.11 Summary 
 1.12 Key Words 
 1.13 Self-Assessment Questions and Exercises 
 1.14 Further Readings 
 
2 
 
1.1 Objectives 
After going through this unit, you will be able to:  
• Discuss the definition and process of counselling 
• Explain the approaches to counselling and helping 
• Describe the development of the counsellor -counselee relationship as well as 
counselling in India 
1.2 Introduction 
Counselling is a form of ‘talking therapy’ that offers people a better chance to change how 
they feel and to live better. Counselling may be required by individuals severely affected by 
mental health illness. Such illness may have resulted from causes related to any form of 
abuse, troubled relations, adolescence, substance use, and so on. For instance, diagnosis of 
depression in adolescents can be difficult as a result of problems demarcating the normal, 
transient inconveniences and developmental issues that occur among this age group. Thus, 
appropriate counselling is essential to prevent the far -reaching effects leading to serious 
consequences. Hence, counselling as a therapy has proved effective in resolving and curing 
problems of different kinds associated with mental health of an individual. In this unit, we 
will discuss the definition and process of counselling, along with the approaches to 
counselling and helping. It will also focus on development of counsellor -counselee 
relationship and counselling in India.  
1.3 Defining Counselling 
The term counselling has been defined by different people in various ways. For instance, 
Rogers (1952) describes counselling as the process by which the structure of the self is 
relaxed in the safety of the client’s relationship with the therapist and previously denied 
experiences are perceived and then integrated into an altered self. But according to, Pepinsky 
and Pepinsky (1954), counselling refers to an ‘interaction which occurs between two 
individuals called the counsellor and the client that takes place in a professional setting and is 
initiated and maintained to facilitate changes in the behaviour of the client’. 
Gustad (1953) thought of counselling as a ‘learning oriented process that is carried out in a 
simple one to one social environment , in which the counsellor ( who is professionally 
competent in relevant psychological skills and knowledge) seeks to assist the client, by 
methods appropriate to the latter’s needs and within the context of the total personal 
programme to learn how to put, such understanding into effect, in relation to more clearly 
perceived, realistically defined goals to the end that the client may become a happier and 
more productive member of the society’. 
Similarly, Smith (1955) defines counselling as a process in which the counsellor assists the 
counselee to make an interpretation of facts relating to a choice, plan or adjustments which he 
needs to make. In the same year (1955), Hahn and MacLean defined counselling as a ‘process 
which takes place in a one-to-one relationship between an individual beset problems with 
which he cannot cope alone and a professional worker whose training and experience have 
qualified him to help others reach solutions to various types of personal difficulties’. 
3 
 
Patterson (1959) states that ‘counselling is a process involving interpersonal relationships 
between a therapist and one or more client by which the former employs psychological 
methods based on systematic knowledge of the human personality in attempting to improve 
mutual health of the latter’. 
Perez (1965) defined counselling as an ‘interactive process conjoining the counselee who 
needs assistance and the counsellor who is trained and educated to give this assistance’. 
Blocher (1966) explains counselling as ‘helping an individual become aware of himself and 
the ways in which he is reacting to the behavioural influences of his environment. It further 
helps him to establish some personal meaning for this behaviour and to develop and clarify a 
set of goals and values for future behaviour’. 
Along similar lines, Wrenn (1970) defined counselling as a process that is concerned with 
decision-making skills and problem resolution. The counsellor aids in decision making, in 
expanding his client’s range of alternatives or options open to him, in modifying his 
behaviour patterns in desired directions. 
Stefflre (1970) states that counselling is a learning -teaching process where the client learns 
about his life space as he has to make meaningful and informed choices, he must know 
himself, the facts of his present situation, and the possibilities.......as well as the most likely 
consequences of the various choices. Shertzer and Stone (1976) also define counselling as a 
learning process in which individuals learn about themselves; their interpersonal relationships 
and behaviours that advance their personal development. 
In 1992, Gladding stated that ‘counselling is a relatively short term, interpersonal, theory 
based, professional activity guided by ethical an legal standards that focus on helping persons 
who are basically psychologically healthy to resolve developmental and situational 
problems’. Unlike the above, Belkin (1975) believes that counselling cannot be specifically 
defined since it is a changing entity, but there are skills common to all such facilitative 
relationships. 
From the above -mentioned several , it may be observed that the emphasis placed on the 
various aspects of counselling by various authors differs. Cognitive factors were emphasized 
earlier but subsequently the scope was widened to include the affective factors as well. 
Similarly, in earlier times counselling process was viewed as a one -to-one process but in 
more recent years the scope of the relationship between the counsellor and client is 
broadening from dyadic relationships to group interactions. 
However, all the above-mentioned definitions contain certain similarities. For instance, all of 
them view counselling as a ‘process which involves bringing about sequential changes over a 
period of time leading to a set goal’. All the definitions focus on the counsellor –counselee 
relationship as something that is not casual but is characterized by warmth, responsiveness, 
and understanding. 
Problems can occur/recur during any point in life, therefore counselling must necessarily be 
an ongoing and continuing process concerning persons of all age levels and placed in 
different life situations. ‘The major objective of all types of counselling is to help individuals 
become self -sufficient, self -dependent, self -directed and to adjust themselves efficiently to 
the demands of a better, happier and a meaningful life’. 
4 
 
Counselling is also viewed by most as  both an art and a science. It is a science in the sense 
that these are many things known about the differences between effective counselling and 
ineffective counselling. In addition, research has pointed to several specific attributes of a 
good and a not -so-good counsellor. Also, there are specific types of behaviours that can be 
taken by counsellor to foster growth in the client.                                                                        
On the other hand, counselling is also considered to be an art, because there are certain 
unaccountable and immeasurable dimensions to counselling. Furthermore, counsellors add 
certain ‘artistic’ variations of their own when engaging in counselling clients, which are 
derived from personal flair. The artist angle can also be seen in the manner in which different 
counsellors apply various techniques and methods in a highly personalized manner in the 
counselling process. That is each and every counsellor applies in a very unique manner what 
is known about counselling. 
Several misconceptions are also held by people about counselling. Some of the serious 
misconceptions held about counselling are as follows:  
• Counselling is all about giving information, although some information giving  
can be a part of counselling. 
• Counselling is about giving advice, making suggestions and recommendations. 
• Counselling is about influencing the client’s values, attitudes, beliefs, interests, 
decisions etc. with or without any threat. 
• Counselling is all about interviewing clients.  
In fact, counselling is concerned with bringing about a voluntary change in the client. The 
counsellor provides facilities to help achieve the desired change or make the suitable change. 
The decisions and choices are eventually made by the client where the counsellor simply 
assists the client in arriving at these decisions through a warm and understanding relationship. 
1.3.1 Characteristics of Counselling 
Humans are highly complex beings both physically and psychologically and so are the range 
of problems and situations they encounter. Human deal with a myriad of situations ranging 
from emotional conflicts to basic decision making, to interpersonal relationships, to minor 
conflicts, to learning problems, to vocational problems etc. To help people deal effectively 
with all these problems, specialized skills and techniques are developed, which are provided 
by counsellors in the form of counselling. Counselling is characterized as a professional 
activity or a process that deals with “comparatively normal psychologically healthy people” It 
aims to bring about some learning or change in the behaviour of these “comparatively normal 
psychologically healthy people”. Counselling deals with personal, social, vocational or 
educational concerns and it includes many sub specialities such as career counselling, child 
counselling, marital counselling, etc. 
The term counselling over the years has been used synonymously with several other terms 
like advising, guidance, helping relationship, as a solution to human problems, psychotherapy 
etc. However, it both shares few things in common and yet differs from them in several ways. 
For instance, advising means ‘giving assistance to an individual who may face the problem of 
5 
 
taking a decision or making a choice’. This situation has several important features as it has 
an element of voluntariness and a ‘belief that the other person has the necessary experience, 
wisdom, and ability to advice’. The advice sought is usually for a ‘reality check’ of views by 
the client. The advice given is ‘not binding on the person who seeks it’, that is, the person 
may accept or reject it, may approach another person for the same which could also be 
rejected if found unsuitable or unacceptable. Advising has no psychological implications as 
regards individual development. Advice may be helpful only in a particular situation, it may 
not be generalized. Therefore, the role may be very limited. 
The second term with which counselling is used synonymous with is guidance. However, 
counselling is not only guidance. The term guidance refers to the “assistance given to an 
individual in making intelligent choices and adjustments.” It is based on the assumption that 
it is the duty and right of every individual to choose one’s own way of life as long as the 
choice does not interfere with or infringe on the rights of others. It is also based on the belief 
that the ability to make such choices is not inborn but like other abilities it must be 
developed.  
When we say that counselling is not all about guidance, we say so as guidance essentially 
consists of giving information in order to help people arrive at certain choices of their life. 
According to Pasricha and Jones, guidance activities include orientation, program testing, 
help in study skills, career and educational information. The term guidance has been 
explained by various people differently. For instance, Nelson -Jones (1994) defined guidance 
“as the help given by one person to another in making choices and adjustments and in solving 
problems.” According to Pasricha, guidance consists of a group of services which assist an 
individual with the knowledge and the necessary skills to make choices, plans and 
interpretations for adjustment so that the individual may make an effective member of the 
group. Pasricha states that there are three main aims of guidance: 
· To help the individual understand one’s own interests, abilities etc. 
· To provide information on educational and occupational requirements and 
opportunities. 
· To provide means for determining placement of individuals in a class, occupation or 
community. 
In short, information is necessarily given in counselling, but all information -giving is not 
counselling. Counselling differs from guidance in that it is therapeutic. 
The term counselling also differs from clinical psychology, as unlike counselling, clinical 
psychology is concerned with the description, classification, diagnosis, and prognosis of 
psychological illnesses. The clinical psychologist usually functions in a clinical setting, that 
is, in a hospital. Usually a clinical psychologist is found working in close association with the 
psychiatrist, thereby aiding and providing assistance to him in the diagnosis and evaluation of 
psychological disorders. As compared to a clinical psychologist, the counsellor deals with 
less severe psychological disorders that do not require hospitalization but which seriously or 
adversely affect ease of adjustment. 
6 
 
There are some who view counselling as another form of helping relationship. However, it 
may not be correct to see counselling just as a helping relationship as a helping relationship is 
characterized by certain essential features (Shertzer and Stone, 1968) as follows: 
 · It is meaningful because it is personal and intimate 
 · It is affective in nature involving mild to strong emotional relationships 
· It involves the integrity of the helper and the helped and is sustained 
voluntarily 
· It involves the mutual consent of the counsellor and the counselee, either 
explicitly stated or implicitly  
· It takes place because the individual in need of help is aware of one’s own 
limitations and inadequacies. 
 · It involves confidence reposed in the helper 
· It is often achieved and maintained through communication and interaction; it 
involves give and take, that is, it is not a one-way process. 
· It involves a certain amount of structure. The situation is either vaguely or 
clearly defined. 
· It is marked by the desire for change in the existing condition of the client, that 
is, it is concerned with the improvement of the client. 
Some even view counselling as a solution to human problems.  Counselling certainly helps 
people in dealing with their problems but it cannot be seen simply as a solution provider as in 
it the counsellor does not give solution as such or does not make choice and decision on the 
behalf of the client. Instead, “counselling aims at helping clients to understand and accept 
themselves ‘as they are’,” and enables them to work towards realizing their potential. 
Counselling often involves modification of attitudes, outlook, and behaviour. The nature of 
the counselling process also depends on the setting or the situation in which counselling is 
required. The counsellor has unconditional regard and acceptance for the client’s personality 
or self. In counselling, the counsellor does not attempt to solve the client’s problems or 
suggest choices that could reduce his/her emotional conflicts. Through counselling, the client 
is helped to discover for oneself the strengths and weaknesses one may have. Counselling 
aims at helping individual reach a stage or a state of self -autonomy through self -
understanding, self-direction and self-motivation. 
Counselling and psychotherapy are two terms that are often used analogously. Rogers (1942), 
Patterson (1973) etc. believed that there is no difference between the two. However, there are 
some who believe that they are similar and different in many ways. The two are similar in 
following ways: 
· Both share similar goals namely self -exploration, self -understanding, and 
behavioural change. 
· Both aim at eliminating self -defeating behaviours and enabling people to 
develop effective rational ways of dealing with various situations in their life. 
7 
 
· Both lay a great deal of emphasis on helping clients develop better decision 
making and planning skills and become autonomous beings. 
· The client-counsellor relationship is an integral part of both counselling and 
psychotherapy. 
Some view psychotherapy as a broader term which is a host of several therapies, with 
hypnosis at one extreme and counselling at another. Thus for them counselling is a form of 
psychotherapy. Rao (1989), draws the distinction between counselling and psychotherapy on 
the following four basis: 
 (i) Individual receiving help: In counselling, the person is designated as a client 
but in psychotherapy the person is designated as a patient. Counselling deals with people who 
are basically psychologically healthy whereas psychotherapy deals with people who are 
mentally ill. 
 (ii) Severity of problems concerned:  Psychotherapy deals with problems that 
have developed into rigid neurotic patterns embedded into an individual’s personality 
structure. Whereas, counselling deals with relatively less severe developmental and 
situational problems like learning difficulties, minor conflicts etc. 
 (iii) Person giving help:  Psychotherapy is generally provided by clinical 
psychologists who are trained in relevant psychological skills and knowledge whereas 
counselling is provided by counsellors who are trained in various counselling techniques. 
 (iv) The setting in which the help is rendered:  Psychotherapist providing 
psychotherapy are usually seen in hospital settings but counsellors providing counselling are 
seen in schools, rehabilitation centres etc. 
In addition to the above mentioned differences, there is also a difference in the techniques 
employed by the two. In psychotherapy, the treatment is given based on various therapeutic 
models which are based more on the medical model of treatment. Whereas, in counselling, 
the objective of self -enhancement, self -integration etc. are accompanied through the 
psychological techniques of establishing rapport, providing unconditional warmth, 
acceptance, regard and gaining insight. 
According to Belkin (1988) two other prominent positions which help to draw a distinction 
between counselling and psychotherapy are: 
(i) Seriousness of the client-patient problems and the emotional depth and intensity of the 
treatment:  “Counselling is concerned with helping individuals learn new ways of dealing 
with and adjusting to life situation and in developing sound decision making skills. It does 
not attempt to restructure personality as in psychotherapy but rather it attempts to develop 
what already exists” (Perry, 1955). 
(ii) The theoretical foundations, practical concerns, and discrepant historical origins. 
Counselling is directed at helping clients deal with their immediate problems and improve 
their life situations whereas  psychotherapy is more interested in certain areas of personality, 
particularly areas that are symptomatic of the past emotional disturbances or conflict. 
Psychotherapy is based more on the medical model of treatment, on the theories of 
personality, theories of psychopathology and a body of clinical te chniques. On the contrary, 
8 
 
counselling is built upon physiological foundations emphasizing more the person’s 
individuality, uniqueness and his phenomenological world. 
In short, some differences do exist between counselling and psychotherapy but they are 
quantitative— a difference in degree —rather than qualitative. In other words, they are not 
entirely separate process, but rather different ways of approaching the same fundamental and 
slightly complex phenomenon—the human being. 
1.3.2 Evolution of Counselling 
The field of counselling is also seen by many both as an art and as a science. According to 
Gustad (1953), ‘counselling is a learning oriented process, carried out in a simple one to one 
social environment, in which, the counsellor, professionally competent in relevant 
psychological skills and knowledge seeks to assist the client, by methods appropriate to the 
latter’s need and within the context of the total personal programme, to learn how to put, such 
understanding into effect in relation to more clearly perceived realistically defined goals to 
the end that the client may become a happier and more productive member of the society’. 
One can certainly say, that counselling is a ‘relatively short term, interpersonal theory based, 
professional activity guided by ethical an logical standards that focuses on helping persons 
who are basically psychologically healthy to resolve developmental and situational problems’ 
(Gladding, 1992). 
Counselling represents the fusion of many influences. It brings together the movement 
towards a more compassionate treatment of mental problems begun in mid -nineteenth 
century, France, the psychodynamic insights of Freud and psychoanalysis; the scientific 
scrutiny and methodology of the behavioural approach; the quantitative science of 
psychometrics; the humanistic perspective of client -centered therapy; the philosophical bases 
of existentialism, and the practical insights and applications that evolved from the vocational 
guidance movement. 
According to Belkin (1988), the profession of counselling is not some well -established entity, 
but rather it is a dynamic movement still in its developing stages. Perhaps because it is a new 
discipline, counselling in its slow process of gestation and development, has been going 
through a confusing time of doubt and self -examination, a period of finding itself and 
defining itself more precisely. 
Even today, confusion exists about the terms and roles of a counsellor, counsellor educator, 
counsellor psychologist, and clinical psychologist (White , Kagan, Harmon, Fretz and 
Tanney, 1984). In 1977, an entire issue of The Counselling Psychologist attempted to come to 
grips with the professional identity of counselling as a discipline and of counsellor as a 
professional. In his presidential address to Division 17 (the division of counselling 
psychologist) of the American Psychological Association (APA), Norman Kagan (1977) 
compared the role of counsellor to the primary care physician who are ‘broadly skilled and 
have a holistic approach to the individual’. The role, as he conceptualized it, was preventive 
as well as therapeutic. 
Ten years later, Fitzgerald and Osipow (1986), in trying to determine what counsellor and the 
counselling psychologists actually do in their professional time, conducted a national 
occupational analysis of the counselling profession. They surveyed members of Division 17 
9 
 
to determine their job titles, places of employment, and activities performed. The large 
majority worked in an academic setting, with a relatively large no. having full time private 
practice. About 13 per cent worked in counselling centres, another common employment 
setting. 
In short, the field of counselling is actually a growing, evolving, continually changing 
concept, responsive to a nexus of interlocking pressure and concerns. In the late 1980s, 
counselling is clearly a movement dedicated to personal and social growth and change, a 
movement which itself is still in the process of growing, changing and defining itself. 
Foundations of Counselling Philosophical, Sociological, and Psychological Foundations 
The counselling profession has its foundations in: laboratory psychology; innovative 
approaches to the treatment of the ‘insane’; the mental hygiene movement; the mental testing 
movement; the influence of humanistic psychology; and the vocational guidance movement. 
The laboratory psychology began in 1879 when Wilhelm Wundt set up the first experimental 
psychology laboratory in Leipzig, Germany. The field of psychology began to get recognition 
quite gradually, first in the academic profession and then in the public sphere. Enhancement 
in the fields of physiology and empirical enhancements in the area of philosophy also 
facilitated the growth of laboratory psychology. The physiological studies of E.H. Weber, 
Johannes Muller, and Hermann V on Helmholtz revealed that there is a significant relationship 
between physical and mental states.  
Wundt, thereby, tried to study the structure of the mind by using the method of introspection. 
This method required the subjects to verbalize and self -reflection all that they were 
experiencing while doing experiments. In fact the use of introspection dates back to the 
Greek philosophers, especially Plato. Using the method of introspection, Wundt began to 
study higher mental functions by directing them at self observation and tried to make them 
experimental, which eventually helped making psychology more empirical and scientific in 
nature. 
The major limitation with this method was that there was too much room for subjectivity. It 
was also difficult to replicate its findings, hence soon Wundt’s method of introspection was 
modified by William James (a functionalist), who attempted to discover its functions, instead 
of simply studying the structure of mind. William James and his followers gradually 
developed new experimental design to study perception, attention, responses to stimuli, habit 
patterns, and so on, with the idea of understanding why the mind functions as it does.  
Around the same time behaviourism appeared in 1912 which had a significant influence on 
the field of counseling. Unlike structualists and functionalists, behaviourists instead of 
studying consciousness began to study observable and measurable behaviour. With this as its 
working premise, behaviourists tried to “formulate, through systematic observation and 
experimentation the generalizations, laws and principles that underlie the individual’s 
behavior (Watson, 1919). 
The significant differences among the above-mentioned schools regarding what psychology 
should study, arose questions like —should psychologists be primarily concerned with 
feelings, perceptions, associations, and other manifestations of consciousness, or should they 
focus their attention on symptoms, actions, learning, and other observable and quantifiable 
10 
 
forms of behaviour? This brought counsellors in the field of counselling to address questions 
like—should the counselor be primarily concerned with the client’s condition of 
consciousness— his or her subjectivity —vague as this concept is, or should the counsellor 
deal primarily with the client’s observable and empirically modifiable behaviour? These 
fundamental questions still challenge us. The responsibility of each counsellor entering the 
profession to decide which proposition is acceptable and which assumptions will act as a 
guide in practice.  
Despite all the early school theorists who tried to investigate the complexities of the human 
psyche, there were no psychological attempts to treat emotional problems or emotional 
illnesses. In fact, no such discipline arose until the mid -nineteenth century when a number of 
disparate movements took hold and individually attempted to treat mental and emotional 
illness in a humane, constructive, scientifically valid manner. Before that, the mentally ill 
were treated in an inhumane manner by the magic healers or the priests or the medicine men. 
Yet their work ultimately led to the psychological treatment of emotional disorders.  
Soon asylums were developed to keep these mentally ill people. In France in 1793, a young 
psychiatrist, Dr. Philippe Pinel, was given charge of the notorious Bicetre asylum. Pinel 
believed that the main job of an asylum was to restore the mentally ill people to the level of 
functional mental health. His efforts lead to the mental health movement which met with 
much opposition from the community and from the national government. 
After Pinel, a significant contribution in the treatment of mentally ill was made by Jean 
Martin Charcot, who was a distinguished neurologist, with a special interest in psychosomatic 
diseases. He had spent several years diagnosing and treating patients who believed they were 
suffering from a form of paralysis or epilepsy, but who actually had nothing physically wrong 
with them. He labeled this disorder hysteria and formulated a detailed clinical description of 
it, distinguishing it from closely related symptomatic disorders. He pioneered the use of 
hypnosis as a clinical tool in the diagnosis of hysterical disorders, suggesting that hypnosis 
itself was a form of, ‘artificial’ hysteria. 
Charcot used hypnosis as a tool to diagnose hysterical patients but Janet (one of his 
colleagues) used hypnosis as a method to treat hysterical patients. He discovered through trial 
and error that persons with hysteria were able to recall memories and feelings from the past, 
under hypnosis. During hypnosis, when the client tended to remember his buried and 
forgotten memories, a sudden alleviation of the debilitating symptoms was seen. This sudden 
freeing of these dammed-up memories was termed as catharsis. 
Impressed by the works of Charcot, Freud along with Breuer, used the cathartic -hypnotic 
treatment in with hysterical patients. At the same time in the United States, there was no 
national policy, no prominent physicians and no humanitarian organization that watched out 
for the interests of the mentally ill. The mentally ill were separated from the society and were 
kept away from so called normal people by giving the rationale that this is going to be good 
for the mentally ill and for the general welfare. During this same time, the vocational 
guidance movement was in its flowering stages in the United States. 
That was the time when it was needed that the public should become sensitive towards the 
plight of mentally ill. Clifford Beers strongly believed that the mentally ill should be treated 
in a humanitarian manner. Clifford Beers was a minor clerk in the financial district of New 
11 
 
York City, who suffered from schizophrenia and had spent many of his years in mental 
institutions. During his stay at these mental institutions, he was quite outraged by the 
conditions in these institutes and often felt helpless as during his stay there he was unable to 
do anything about these mental institutions.  
However, after recovering to a level where he was functional enough, he wrote a book about 
his experiences A Mind That Found Itself which became an influential bestseller. His personal 
experiences in the form of the book instigated rapid and sweeping changes in the field of 
mental health care. They bought about a reform, which was much needed. Soon, he became a 
social activist and a crusader, helping to find the society for mental hygiene. 
Once the American public became aware of the need for mental health reform, the 
innovations of Freud and his contemporaries were quickly imported and put into practice. 
From the 1920s onward, psychoanalysis and its derivative approaches (especially Adlerian 
therapy) began to make an impact on the counseling movement. The laboratory work of 
Watson, Skinner, and the other behavioural psychologists also began to influence the 
counseling movement. 
Greatly influenced by Wundt’s work in Europe, several students from United States came to 
his laboratory to learn the new experimental methods being used there. Each student brought 
back to the United States a cornucopia of methodological procedures and intellectual insight 
which were to be applied in their own special areas of interests and expertise. One of the 
more famous of these students, was a young man named G. Stanley Hall who would 
ultimately have an important impact on the counseling movement, Granville Stanley Hall can 
be rightly said to be the father of American psychology, although James was the first 
American psychologist. James was the leader of the American Psychology movement and 
was responsible for giving psychology and ultimately counseling their orientation and 
direction. He established one of the first psychology departments, organized the APA, and 
was responsible for granting the first doctorates in this new field, thus providing increased 
recognition for the profession. 
In 1883, Hall set up a private laboratory for psychological study at John Hopkins University 
in Baltimore. Soon, psychological laboratories were formed at Harvard, Pennsylvania, 
Wisconsin, Columbia, Clark, Cornell, Indiana, Brown, Stanford, Yale, and Chicago 
Universities. Another significant contribution in the field of psychology was made by L. M. 
Terman, who was trained by Hall and is known for his studies of the gifted. 
At Clark University, Hall conducted his famous studies of children and adolescents, which 
can be considered as the first true psychological investigations of human development. His 
studies significantly helped in defining child and adolescent psychology as significant 
disciplines. These studies also became indirectly the source of American psychologists’ 
interest in the quantitative approach to science, which later had an enduring effect on the 
American testing movement. 
This testing movement became a significant part of counseling as counselors and educators 
began to recognize the value of testing. Then in the late nineteenth century, Sir Francis Galton 
tried to devise a simple measure of intelligence. Soon the profession of counseling became 
closely involved with and influenced by testing and measurement movement. Binet’s 
development of first IQ tests; Lewis M. Terman’s administration of the test to a large 
12 
 
population and Edward L. Thorndike’s myriad contributions to the testing movement all had 
a significant impact on the profession of counseling. 
Soon a large number of quantitative tools were developed to help assess the client’s needs, to 
measure their abilities, aptitudes, and problems and to evaluate more correctly the results of 
the counselling experience. By the 1950s there was no area of counselling that had not been 
profoundly influenced by the testing movement. Till date counseling considers assessment 
and appraisal as central to its effective functioning as a distinct profession.  
Both the behavioural laboratory psychology and use of empirical, quantitative methods in the 
form of testing offered a scientific dimension to counselling. However, the most notable 
reaction to the quantitative influence in counselling was provided by the humanistic approach 
which found the use of quantitative methods in the study of human psychology as too 
depersonalizing. The humanistic approach advocates that patients should be viewed as a total, 
distinct, and important individuals and not just as a proof for some tentative theory of 
behavior, learning, or psychosexual development.  
Carl R. Rogers was the pioneer of the nondirective psychology and his ideas have had a 
significant impact upon the development of counseling. Rogers’s influence upon the 
counselling movement is incalculable and the tradition he established set the stage for the 
merging of the terms counseling and psychology.  
Another school of thought called as the philosophy of existentialism, also had a significant 
influence on the field of counseling. Existentialism postulates that people are free agents, 
seeking meaning in their lives through their voluntary actions and they are responsible for the 
consequences of the actions taken by them. The impact of Existential approaches have been 
significant in the areas of vocational counseling, job training, personal work, and 
rehabilitation counseling. The revolution also began to influence the vocational guidance 
movement which was originated by Frank Parson. The vocational guidance aimed at helping 
individuals find themselves through their work and this goal of self -fulfillment made it 
compatible with the growing counselling movement. 
In addition, other changes at that time like industrialization, specialization, urbanization, the 
changing role of women, the growing need for education, rising enrollments, expanding 
curricula, rising secularism, the desire for useful education and new educational theories etc. 
further created and intensified the need for guidance-personnel work.  
In short, counselling has evolved in part from the vocational guidance movement, which was 
brought about largely by the changing social and demographic forces that played so crucial 
role in shaping the field of counseling the way it is today.  
Check Your Progress 
 1. Define counselling according to Pepinsky and Pepinsky (1954).  
 2. Mention any two misconceptions held by people about counselling.  
 3. Define clinical psychology.  
 4. Name some works during the testing movement which had a significant     
impact on the profession of counselling.  
13 
 
1.4 Counselling Process: Development of Counsellor-Counselee Relationship 
In this section, we will discuss the stages of counselling in detail. 
1.4.1 Initial Session  
The counselling process begins with the initial session. The initial counselling interview is 
often critical to the ultimate success or failure of the entire course of the counselling process. 
In the first session, both counsellor and client work to figure out if they want to or can 
continue the relationship. 
The initial counselling interview can be counsellor or client initiated and can center on the 
gathering of information or on relationship dynamics. When counsellor initiated, the 
counsellor should immediately state the reason for wanting to see the client but when client 
initiated, he should listen as hard as possible to what ever the client has to say (Benjamin, 
1981). Information -oriented interview focuses on gathering information through the use of 
probes, accents, closed questions and request for classification (Hackney and Cormier, 1988). 
Such interviews are usually conducted by counsellors who are employed by medical, mental 
health, correctional, rehabilitation and social agencies for psychological, vocational, or 
psycho-social assessment.  
Relationship-oriented interviews focus more on the client’s attitudes and emotions. Common 
counsellor responses include re -statement, reflection of feelings, summarizing feelings, 
request for classification and acknowledgement of non -verbal behaviour (Haurney and 
Cormier, 1988). 
Counsellors begin an initial interview by trying to make their clients feel comfortable 
(Hackney and Cormier, 1988; Pretrofesa et al. 1984; Shertzer and Stone, 1980). Basic 
attending behaviour and client observation skills helps in establishing and maintaining 
rapport which is vital for the disclosure of information and the ultimate success of 
counselling. Benefits derived from the initial interview can be enhanced by the counsellor 
through appropriately conveyed empathy, encouragement, support, caring, attentiveness, 
acceptance and genuineness. 
In the initial interview, it is critical that counsellors are able to convey primary empathy 
(Patterson and Eisenberg, 1983) via verbal and non -verbal communication. It refers to 
conveying that counsellor has understood the client’s major themes. Advanced empathy 
which is a process of helping a client explore themes, issues and emotions new to his or her 
awareness (Patterson and Eisenberg, 1983) is usually inappropriate for an initial interview 
because it examines too much material too quickly. In either case empathy may be fostered 
by attentiveness that is the amount of verbal and non-verbal behaviour shown to the client. 
Verbal behaviour like probing, requesting, clarification, re -statement and summarizing 
feelings and non -verbal behaviour like smiling, learning forward, making eye contact, 
gesturing and head moving (Mehrabian, 1970) indicate that the counsellor is interested in and 
is open to clients. Egan (1990), summarized five non -verbal skills as SOLER (smile, open -
posture, learning forward, eye -contact and relax). According to Eisenberg (1983), counsellor 
should generally avoid — advice giving, lecturing, excessive questioning and story telling. 
Sack (1985) believes that advice is effective only when asked by the client. 
14 
 
In the final part of building a counselling relationship the counsellor helps the client explore 
specific areas and identify goals. Instead of making unfocussed, unrealistic or un -co-
ordinated goals (Rule, 1982) counsellor should make specific, quantifiable, measurable, 
observable, behavioural, understandable goals which can be clearly stated; are relevant to 
self-defeating behaviour and are achievement and success oriented and are mutually agreed 
on by both the counsellor and the client (Dyer and Vriend, 1977).  
Difficulties like moving too fast or too slow, fear of intensity, client rambling, and   time and 
energy devoted to probing the past in the exploratory and goal -setting stage of counselling 
may inhibit building of a sound solid client-counsellor relationship. 
1.4.2 Termination  
Just as the initial interview and building of a sound client -counsellor relationship is essential 
for the counselling process to be effective, so is the careful termination of the counselling 
relationship. Termination refers to the decision, one -sided or mutual to stop counselling 
(Burke, 1989). It may produce mixed feelings on the part of both the counsellor (Goodyear, 
1981) and the client (London, 1982) and when handled incorrectly, it may cause harm than 
heal. Termination serves several functions like: 
· By signalling that something is finished it reinforces the client’s behavioural 
changes in the direction of the goals as stated by the client (Eisenberg and 
Delancy, 1977). 
· Both the client and the counsellor are motivated by the knowledge that the 
counselling experience is limited in time (Munro and Bach, 1955). 
· It maintains the changes already achieved by providing an opportunity for 
generalizing the acquired problem -solving skills in the real world, that is, it 
puts the insights into action (Gladding, 1990). Thus, what seems like an exit 
becomes an entrance. 
· It serves as a reminder that the client has matured (Vickio, 1990) and is 
capable of establishing mutually supportive relationships and lead a more 
independent and satisfying life (Burke, 1989). 
When to terminate the relationship is a question that has no definite answer. If the 
relationship ends too soon, the client may regress to earlier behaviour but if termination is 
never addressed, client may become too dependent. According to Hackney and Cormier 
(1988), there are several pragmatic universal considerations to keep in mind in timing the 
termination as follows: 
· It is easy to figure out, if the goals have been achieved in a relationship which 
was set up with a behavioural contract. 
· It is easy to figure out, if the client thinks they have accomplished what they 
wanted to accomplish, regardless of specific contracts. 
· Termination is appropriate if the client and the counsellor feel that the 
relationship is not helpful. 
 · If there is a move or prolonged issues, then termination is inevitable. 
15 
 
Termination is a complex area involving several issues as follows: 
1. Termination of individual session:  usually lasts for 45 to 50 minutes. 
Benjamin (1981) proposes two important factors in closing an interview as follows: 
· Both the client and the counsellor should be aware that the session is ending 
· No new material should be introduced or discussed during this ending. If introduced, 
then it should be the focus of the next session. 
There are several ways in which a counsellor can close an interview 
effectively. Some being: 
· By simply making brief statement indicating that the time is up (Benjamin, 1981); 
Hackney and Cormier, 1988) 
· By using non -verbal gestures like looking at watch or standing (Pietrofesa et al, 
1984). Non -verbal gestures are used with verbal indicators as each reinforces the 
other. 
Towards the end of the session, it is usually helpful by summarize what has 
happened in the session. The summarization may be client or counsellor initiated 
(Hausen, Stevic, Warner, 1986). An important part of terminating a session is setting 
up the next appointment (Housen et.al. 1986). 
2. Termination of counselling relationship: Counselling relationships vary in 
length and purpose. The client and counsellor must agree or when termination of the 
relationship is appropriate and helpful. Various behaviour that may signal the end of 
the relationship are: 
· Verbal messages about readiness to terminate 
· Decrease in intensity of work between the client and counsellor 
· Use of more humour or intellectualizing, and less denial, withdrawal, anger, mourning 
or dependence (Corey et al, 1979) 
  Hackney and Cormier (1988) believe that in a relationship that has lasted more 
than three months, the final three to four weeks should be spent discussing the importance of 
termination. Maholick and Turner (1979) suggests specific areas of concern when deciding 
whether to terminate counselling. They are: 
· Examining whether the client’s initial problem, symptoms and stress – producing 
feelings have been reduced or eliminated 
· Assessing whether the client’s copying ability and degree of understanding and 
relating to self and others has improved 
· Examining whether the client has acquired abilities to plan and work productively and 
can enjoy life 
Two other ways to facilitate the ending of the client-counsellor relationship are: 
16 
 
· Fading: by spacing the counselling sessions apart or simply shortening then (Cormer 
and Cormer, 1986). 
· By helping client to develop more successful problem -solving skills (Dixon and 
Glover,1984). 
 3. Resistance to terminate: Patterson and Eisenberg (1983) note that resistance 
is especially likely when the counselling relationship has been of long duration or has 
involved a high level of intimacy. Other factors that promote resistance include —losses, 
loneliness, unresolved grief, need gratification, fear of rejection and fear of having to be self -
reliant. Client resistance may be expressed in various ways like asking for more time at the 
end of a session or asking for more sessions once a goal has been reached or developing new 
problems like depression or anxiety that were not part of the client’s original concern. These 
resistances may be overcome gradually and slowly in various ways (Cormier and 
Cormier,1991). Some of the ways are as follows: 
·            By making the sessions less frequent 
· By highlighting the client’s skills, abilities and available resources 
· By prescribing a limited number of future session and / or concentrate with clients on 
how he or she will set themselves up for relapse (Anderson and Stewart, 1983) 
· For clients who have had traumatic past experience, fear of change may lead to client 
resistance Exploring with them the advantages of working in other therapeutic 
settings, such as support groups may seen helpful (Lerner and Lerner,1983). 
4. Counsellor’s resistance:  Goodyear (1981) lists eight conditions under which 
termination may be especially difficult for counsellor, for example: 
· It signals the end of a significant relationship. 
· It arouses the counsellor’s anxiety about the client’s ability to function independently. 
· It arouses guilt in the counsellor about not having been more effective with the client. 
· When the counsellor’s professional self-concept is threatened by the client who leaves 
abruptly and angrily 
· It signals the end of a learning experience for the counsellor (e.g. when the counsellor 
may be relying on the client to learn more about the dynamics of a disorder 
· It signals the end of a particularly exciting experiencing of living vicariously through 
the adventures of the client. 
· It becomes a symbolic recapitulation of other (especially unresolved) farewells in the 
counsellor’s life. 
· It arouses in the counsellor, conflicts about his or her own individuation.” 
To deal with it, the counsellor should seek consultation from colleagues or 
should himself or herself undergo counselling (Kovacs, 1965, 1976). 
 5. Premature termination: May occur under several circumstances as follows: 
17 
 
· Client is little motivated or committed to change his present circumstances (Baruth 
and Huber, 1985) 
· It may be expressed directly or indirectly by missing or being late for appointments 
Hausen, Warner and Smith (1980), suggest that topic of premature treatment should 
be discussed openly between client and counsellor so as examine the thoughts and 
feeling of client and counsellor and a premature ending can often be prevented. 
On finding that client wishes to quit the counsellor should set up an exit interview. 
Four possible benefits of such as interview according to Ward (1984) are: 
· It helps the clients resolve any positive feelings resulting from the counselling 
experiences itself. 
· It serves as a way to invite the client to continue in counselling if the client so wishes. 
· Another form of treatment or a different counsellor can be considered if the client 
wishes.  
· It increases chances that next time the client needs help, he or she will seek 
counselling. 
Cavanagh (1982) holds that in premature termination, counsellor often make one of 
the two mistakes: 
· They either blame themselves or the client for what is happening. 
· They may develop a cavalier attitude i.e. ‘it is too bad this client has chosen not to 
continue counselling, but I have got other clients too’. 
According to Cavanagh (1982) certain reasons why a client sometimes 
terminates prematurely are: 
· To see if the counsellor cares 
· To elicit positive feelings from the counsellor 
· To punish or try to hurt the counsellor 
· To eliminate anxiety 
· To show the counsellor that client has found a cure elsewhere 
· To express to the counsellor that the client does not feel understood 
Cavanagh (1982) believes that counsellors need to understand that regardless 
of what they do, some clients terminate counselling prematurely. 
6. Counsellor-initiated termination: According to Cavanagh (1982) some of 
the good reasons for the counsellor to terminate are: 
· Illness 
· Working through counter transference 
· Relocation to another area 
18 
 
· An extended trip  
· The realization that client needs could be better served by someone else. 
  Some of the poor reasons (Cavanagh,1982) are: 
· Counsellor’s feelings of anger, boredom, or anxiety which may make the client feel 
rejected and even worse than in the beginning. 
· The Counsellor may have negative feelings about the client 
London (1982) and Seligman (1981) stress that clients and counsellors should 
prepare as far as possible in advance for temporary termination by openly discussing 
about it among each others. 
7. Ending on a positive note: It is important that termination be mutually agreed 
upon, as far as possible. Patterson and Eisenberg (1983) suggests 8 guidelines for 
ending an intense counselling relationship on a positive note: 
· Be clearly aware of the client’s needs and wants 
· Be clearly aware of the counsellor’s needs and wants 
· Be clearly aware of one’s previous experiences with separation and one’s inner 
reactions to these experiences in order to avoid counter-transference. 
· Be aware of the client’s feelings about ending the experience 
· Share honestly with the client how the counsellor feels about the counselling 
experience 
· Reviewing and bringing the major events of counselling experience into the present to 
help client see what he has accomplished 
· Supportively acknowledge the changes the client has made and actively encourage 
him/her maintain it. 
· Invite the client to keep up -to-date on what is happening in his or her life through 
follow-up sessions 
8. Follow-up: reinforces the gains the client has made in counselling and helps 
both the client and the counsellor to re -evaluate the experience. Follow -up may take 
the following four forms as follows: 
· Inviting the client in for a session 
· Through a telephone call to the client 
· Send a letter to the client asking about his current status 
· Mailing the client a questionnaire dealing with current levels of functioning 
9. Referrals and recycling: referrals are made when counsellors are not able to 
help certain clients. Some of the reasons behind referring are as follows: 
· Client has a problem that counsellor does not know how to handle 
19 
 
· Counsellor is inexperienced in a particular area and does not have the necessary skill 
to help the client 
· Counsellor knows an expert who would be more helpful to the client 
· Counsellor and client has incompatible personalities 
· Relationship between the two is stuck in an initial phase of counselling  
  A client may resist a referral if he feels rejected by the counsellor. Patterson 
and Eisenberg (1983) suggest that a counsellor spend at least one session with the client in 
preparation for the referral. Also, the longer the client works with the counsellor the more 
reluctant he or she will be towards a referral. 
  However, recycling is basically the re -examination of all phases of the 
therapeutic process (Baurth and Huber, 1985). It may be that goals were not properly defined 
or an inappropriate strategy was chosen. Recycling gives both the client and the counsellor a 
second chance to achieve what each wants—a positive change. 
1.4.3 Stages of the Counselling Process 
Rogers (1958), examined the process of counselling in terms of the stages of development by 
which personality change take place. He concluded that, in successful counselling, the client 
moves from fixity to changeableness; from rigid structures to flow; from stasis to process. He 
pin-pointed seven crucial stages of the change process, as given below: 
 ·First stage: At the first stage, internal communication is blocked. There is no 
communication of self or personal meanings, no recognition of problems and usually no 
individual desire to change. At this stage, the client is closed, and communicative 
relationships are construed as dangerous as there is no desire to change. 
 ·Second stage: When the client feels himself to be fully accepted as she or he is the 
second stage follows naturally. The second stage is characterized by a number of factors, both 
positive and negative. Expression begins to flow in regard to non -self topics; problems are 
perceived as external to self; there is no sense of personal responsibility in problems; feelings 
are described as un -owned, or sometimes as past objects; feeling may be exhibited, but are 
not recognized as such or owned; experiencing is bound by the structure of the past; personal 
constructs are rigid, and unrecognized as being constructs, but are thoughts of as facts; 
differentiation of personal meanings and feelings are very limited and contradictions may be 
expressed, but with little recognition of them as contradiction. 
 ·Third and fourth stage: The third and fourth stages involve further loosening of 
symbolic expression in regard to feelings, constructs and self. These stages constitute an 
important moving forward in the process.  
 ·Fifth stage: In the fifth stage, feelings are expressed freely as being in the present 
and are very close to being experienced. Feelings tend to ‘bubble up,’ or ‘seep through,’ in 
spite of the fear and distrust which the clients feels at experiencing them with fullness and 
immediacy. There is a beginning tendency to realize that experiencing a feeling involves a 
direct referent and there is an increasing ownership of self feeling, and a desire to be these, to 
be the real self. 
20 
 
 ·Sixth stage: The sixth stage continues this process of growth, self -discovery and a 
self-acceptance, congruence, and responsibility. This is a crucial stage as at this point, the 
client has become very close to an organic being that is always in the process of growth; he or 
she is in touch with the flow of feelings; his or her construction of experiences is free flowing 
and repeatedly being tested against referents and evidence within and without; experience is 
differentiated and thus internal communication is exact. 
 ·Seventh stage: The client often enters the seventh and last stage without the need of 
the counsellor’s help. The client is now a continually changing person, experiencing with 
freshness and immediacy each new situation, responding with real and accepted feelings, and 
showing ‘a growing and continuing sense of acceptant ownership of these changing feelings, 
a basic trust in his own process’. This seven -stage conceptualization represents Roger’s 
clearest, most explicit description of the stages of personal growth, although these stages are 
implicit throughout his writings. 
Check Your Progress 
 5. What are the verbal behaviours and non-verbal behaviours which foster  
 empathy?  
 6. What are the benefits of an exit interview?  
 
1.5 Role of Counsellors 
People become counsellors for many reasons —some functional and some dysfunctional. 
Some of the dysfunctional reasons behind becoming a counsellor according to James Guy 
(1987) are as follows: 
 ·Emotional Distress: Some individuals who have unresolved personal traumas wish 
to become counsellors in order to deal with their emotional distress. 
 ·Vicarious coping: Some people take up the profession of counselling as a way to 
live their lives through others. 
 ·Loneliness and isolation: Some people take up the profession of counselling as a 
way of dealing with their loneliness and isolation and to make friends 
 ·A desire for power:  Individuals who feel frightened and insecure in their personal 
lives try to seek to control others and hence take up the profession of counselling 
 ·A need for love: Sometimes narcissistic and grandiose people take up the profession 
of counselling believing that all problems are resolved through the expression of love and 
tenderness. 
 ·Vicarious rebellion: Some individuals who have unresolved anger, at times take up 
the profession of counselling and act out the anger through their client’s defiant behaviours. 
However, some of the functional reasons behind becoming a counsellor are the realization 
people have that, they possess the necessary skills to become a counsellor as mentioned 
below (James Guy, 1987): 
 ·Curiosity and inquisitiveness: Refers to a natural interest in people 
21 
 
 ·An ability to listen: People who possess this skill tend to find listening   stimulating 
 ·A comfort with conversation: Means that these people enjoy verbal exchanges  
 ·Empathy and understanding: People who possess this skill are able to put 
themselves in other people’s place 
 ·Emotional insightfulness:  People who possess this skill are comfortable dealing 
with a wide range of feelings. 
 ·Introspection: People who possess this skill have the ability to see or feel 
themselves from within 
 ·Capacity of self -denial: Refers to one’s ability to set aside their needs in order to 
listen  
 ·Tolerance of intimacy:  Indicates that the individual has the ability to sustain 
emotional closeness 
·Comfort with power: Suggests that the person has the ability to accept  power with 
a certain degree of detachment. 
·Ability to laugh: People who possess this skill can see the tragic or comic quality of 
life events. 
No matter whatever, be the reason behind becoming a counsellor, studying the techniques and 
theories associated with counselling certainly helps. For instance, Cavanagh (1982) pointed 
out that by studying counselling one may gain insight one’s own life, obtain knowledge and 
skill in relating to others and come to realize how the counselling process works. Overall, the 
effectiveness of counselling depends on numerous variables including the background, 
education, skill and experience of the counsellor. This also brings us to the question of—what 
qualities are indicative of the potential and actual effectiveness of a counsellor? It is 
important to answer this question for several reasons as given below: 
· It helps us better understand the nexus of subtle factors which contribute to the 
success of counselling 
· It is important to counsellor educators who must make crucial decisions in the 
selection and training of students of counselling. 
· It encourages aspiring counsellors to find within themselves and strengthen those 
qualities which have been indicated as predictors of successful counselling 
· It helps in developing techniques and strategies which are derivatives of effective 
counsellor qualities 
· It assists trainers and researchers in determining the probable outcomes of specific 
counselling interactions, based on tested criteria of counselling effectiveness. 
Much related to the above-mentioned question, is another question that is —Is there in fact 
such a thing as an effective counsellor, or are different counsellors effective for different 
reasons to different degrees with different clients? Research over these years has found 
evidence to support both the positions. While some studies have shown that there are 
22 
 
universally important counsellor qualities, other studies have indicated that certain traits work 
well with some clients but not with others. No matter what, one cannot deny the fact, that the 
counsellor’s traits play a vital part in the counsellor interaction and can be used as 
determinants of counsellor effectiveness. 
Corey, Corey and Callanan (1988) have observed that a counsellor’s values, beliefs, personal 
attributes, life experiences and way of living are intrinsically related to the way he or she 
functions as a professional. They identified ten personal qualities that are found in effective 
counsellors as mentioned below: 
· A sincere interest in the welfare of others 
· The ability to be present for others: The ability and willingness to be with them in 
their experiences of joy and pain. 
· A recognition and acceptance of one’s personal power: Being in contact with one’s 
own strength and vitality; without need to diminish others or feel superior to them. 
· The knowledge that one has found his or her own counselling style, that style being an 
expression of one’s own personality 
· A willingness to be vulnerable and to take risks 
· Self-respect and self-appreciation: A strong sense of self-worth 
· A willingness to serve as models for their clients 
· A willingness to risk making mistakes and to admit having made them 
· A growth orientation 
· A sense of humour 
In addition to the above-mentioned qualities, an effective counsellor should also have the 
ability to promote the welfare of the client and should be open -minded and flexible. By this 
we mean, that the counsellor should have the capacity to hear, believe, and respond in an 
open and non -judgemental fashion to clients who may have values, belief, and lifestyles 
different from his/her own. This quality is especially important in being able to work 
effectively with clients of the opposite gender or of a different ethnic origin and with clients 
with alternative lifestyles including sexual orientation. 
According to Carl Rogers; empathy, genuineness, and unconditional positive regard are three 
major qualities of an effective counsellor. In a massive research effort, Rogers and his 
colleagues (Rogers et al, 1967) found that regardless of the method or technique used by the 
therapist, effective therapy would take place, if the therapist fulfils the following three 
conditions: 
· The therapist responds as the real person he actually is in this relationship at the 
moment. He/she employs no artificial front (genuineness) 
· The therapist senses and expresses the client’s felt meaning, catching what the client 
communicates as it seems to the client (empathy) 
23 
 
· The therapist experiences a warm and positive acceptance towards the client 
(unconditional positive regard) 
Rollo May and others believe that individual who have experience some emotional distress 
and have been able to successfully resolve it are better able to connect with their clients 
authentically in ways not possible otherwise. 
Unlike Rollo May, Cormier and Cormier (1985), the most effective helper is one who has 
achieved a balance of interpersonal and technical competence. According to them, the six 
qualities of an effective counsellor are as follows: 
· Intellectual competence:  Counsellors must have a thorough knowledge of many 
theories, as well as the desire and ability to learn. 
· Energy: Counselling is emotionally draining and physically demanding. Counsellors 
need to have the ability to be active in their sessions. 
· Flexibility: Effective counsellors are not tied to one specific theory or set of methods. 
Instead they adapt what they do to meet the needs of their clients. 
· Support: The counsellor supports the client in making his or her own decisions helps 
engender hope and power avoids trying to rescue the client. 
· Goodwill: The nature of good will encompasses such qualities as the counsellor’s 
desire to work on behalf of the client in a constructive way that ethically promotes 
client independence. 
· Self-awareness: This quality includes knowledge of one’s self, including attitudes 
and feelings about self and the ability to recognize how and what factors affect those 
attitudes and feelings. 
According to Holland (1977), specific personality types are attracted to certain work 
environments and correspond best with those environments. The environment in which a 
counsellor works is primarily a social and problem -oriented one. It calls for skill in 
interpersonal relationships and for creativity. Wiggins and Weslander (1979) found empirical 
support for Holland’s hypothesis. They found in general that those counsellors who were 
rated ‘highly effective’, scored highest on the social and artistic scales of the vocational 
preference inventory (Holland, 1977). Counsellors who were rated ineffective, in general, 
scored highest on the realistic and conventional scales of this test. Other factors like sex, age 
and level of education, were found to be significant in predicting effectiveness. 
Counsellor’s effectiveness is also strongly affected by certain personality related factors like 
stability, harmony, constancy and purpose. According to Carkhuff and Berenson, 1967 and 
Kottler, 1986, the potency of counselling is related to the personal togetherness of counsellors 
and to their ability to be present with their clients. 
It has also been found that counsellors who have healthy personal lives and who learn from 
their mistakes as well as their success are more likely than others to grow therapeutically and 
to be able to sensitively concentrate on their clients problems to the fullest (Cormmier, 1988). 
24 
 
According to Belkin, an effective counsellor should possess the following three qualities —
knowing oneself; understanding others, and relating to others. The details of the same are 
given below: 
1. Knowing oneself: Before a counsellor can attempt to understand a client, he or she 
must have an objective and satisfying understanding of the self. Counsellors must be able to 
recognize and accept their strengths and weaknesses. In this regard, three personality 
characteristics most essential to effective counsellor are —security, trust and courage to 
counsel. 
· Security: The pre-requisite to security are self -confidence and self -respect. A secure 
counsellor is one who is free from fear and anxiety and is able to maintain a flexible and 
objective view of self. In one study, Milliken and Kirchner (1971), found that the “more 
anxious a counsellor was, the less accurate was his or her ability to recall words spoken and 
feelings expressed in simulated interviews.” Insecure counsellors tended to act more 
defensively with their clients than do secure counsellors.  This happens so, as insecure 
counsellors fear the client’s anger and rejection and consequently attempt more to please than 
to help the client. Insecure counsellors may also take advantage of their clients, manipulating 
a client into meeting the unhealthy needs of the counsellor. Unlike insecure counsellors, 
secure counsellors are more likely to allow their clients to be themselves. 
· Trust: it is believed that people who experience difficulty trusting others are usually 
themselves untrustworthy. Therefore, a counsellor who is suspicious, who questions every 
person’s motives, whose cynicism colours all interactions, is unlikely to relate to clients in a 
manner that contributes to growth and adjustment. Usually, untrusting counsellors tend to 
attribute feelings and ideas to clients, not because the client has expressed them, but rather 
because the counsellor considers such ideas and feelings common to all people. 
· The courage to counsel: a committed counsellor must be willing to bear the often 
unjustified brunt of the client’s anger. The counsellor must be willing to feel a profound and 
distressing sense of aloneness as the client progressing during the treatment, goes away and 
becomes autonomous. 
2. Understanding others: Requires open -mindedness, a non -judgmental attitude, 
sensitivity, empathy, and objectivity. 
· Open-mindedness: Refers to freedom from fixed pre -conceptions and an attitude of 
open receptivity to that which the client is expressing. The open -minded counsellor is able to 
accommodate the client’s values, insights, feelings and perceptions that are different from his 
or her own. Moreover, he or she is able to experience and interact with the client throughout a 
wide breath and range of feelings. Open -mindedness also implies the ability to listen, to 
respond, to interact with the client, free from the constraints of imposing value criteria. 
According to Anderson, Lepper and Ross (1980) a person who is not open-minded is likely to 
persist in believing incorrect things about a client even in the face of contradicting evidence. 
Thus open-mindedness is necessary for honest communication. 
· A non-judgemental attitude: An open-minded counsellor is also non -judgemental. It 
means that the effective counsellor should have a well developed and meaningful sense of 
values with which he or she feels satisfied. Adopting a non -judgemental attitude means that 
25 
 
the counsellor refrains from judging the guilt or innocence of the client, it does not mean that 
the counsellor may not objectively judge the attitudes, standards or actions of the client. 
· Sensitivity: Refers to a cognitive and an emotional response to the client as a total 
individual. It allows a counsellor to make a deeper and a spontaneous response to the needs, 
feelings, conflicts, doubts and so on of the client. 
· Empathy: It refers to an individual’s ability to put himself or herself emotionally and 
intellectually in the client’s place, be the client momentarily, think and feel as the client does. 
It requires that the counsellor must be able to maintain an individual identity and remain 
sensitively aware of the differences between himself or herself and the client. 
· Objectivity: Means to be able to stand back and observe what is happening from a 
neutral or non-imposing frame of reference. 
 3. Relating to others:  The qualities that help a counsellor to relate and 
communicate more effectively with the client are — genuineness, non-dominance, listening, 
positive regard and communication skills. 
· Genuineness: According to Rogers (1957), it means that within the relationship the 
counsellor is freely and deeply himself, with his actual experience accurately represented by 
his awareness of himself. The genuine counsellor, minimizes dependence upon roles and 
increases giving of self to the client. The genuine counsellor is open, honest and at all times 
herself or himself. 
· Non-dominance: The non-dominant counsellor is one who is capable of sitting back 
and allowing the client to initiate and direct the course of the counselling interview. 
Remaining non -dominant may produce tension and anxiety in the counsellor. Hence, non -
dominance appears as the ability to listen. 
· Listening: It is related to open -mindedness and sensitivity. It means sitting back, 
paying attention, not interrupting and not attempting to direct what client s are saying. It is 
related to non-dominance. 
· Positive regards: According to Rogers (1962) it means prizing the client as a person 
regardless of his particular behaviour at the moment. It is based on the assumption that 
“growth and change are more likely to occur, the more that the counsellor is experiencing a 
warm, positive, acceptant attitude toward what is the client.” It is a genuine and sincere 
feeling of affection for clients. It is an attitude that inevitably makes the client feels more 
secure, more worthwhile as a person, more willing to grow and prosper. It is often expressed 
as acceptance and warmth. 
· Communication skills: Since counselling is a verbal process, therefore the counsellor 
needs to have good communication skills. The counsellor needs to have a proficient 
language, good vocabulary, acceptable speech patterns and the like, and he should be able to 
direct communication to levels for which they are intended. One criterion of good 
communication is the ability to anticipate the effect that words will have on a client, to know 
in advance, before saying them, the inferences, denotations and connotations of the words 
used and the messages transmitted. A good counsellor is often concerned with the shades and 
levels of meaning each word has in their client’s thinking. 
26 
 
To conclude, one can say that it is very difficult to find a person who possesses all the 
qualities of a perfect counsellor. Temperament, background, and experience, make some  
better suited to become counsellors than others. Those persons whose personal traits match 
the demands of the profession are more likely to be personally and professionally satisfied 
with the role of counsellor.  
Most studies agree that personnel traits are important in determining counsellor’s 
effectiveness for e.g., Jovne (1981) found that counsellor’s personality characteristics are 
more important than skills. Murphy Etal (1975) also found a significant co -relation between 
counsellor’s characteristics and effectiveness.  
However, Messer and Boals (1981) in one study found out that if brief training is provided to 
individuals whose personalities make them suitable as counsellors, they can perform 
effectively.  
In addition to the training a counsellor receives, the counselling process also gets affected by 
the personality of the counsellor i.e. the kind of person the counsellor is. It can have either a 
functional or detrimental effect on the counselling process.  
Counsellors are real people with their own idiosyncratic natures, their own set of particular 
needs, their own values, problems conflicts, any of which may at times work to the detriment 
of the counselling process. Counsellor’s problems, perceptions, feelings and values exert a 
continuing influence upon the counselling process. It would be ideal if the counsellor puts 
aside all the personal problems and adjustment difficulties before entering the counselling 
room. Thus for counselling to be effective, the counsellors must have their own life in order. 
Some of the problems that counsellors face which may be detrimental to the counselling 
process are as follows :  
· Meaninglessness: A counsellor who carries a sense of meaninglessness is likely to 
restrict the emotional interchanges with others which may prevent him or her from 
experiencing life to the fullest. Meaninglessness is a serious obstacle in the counsellor’s 
striving for effectiveness in counselling exchanges with the client.  
· Alienation: It assumes many forms including a deep sense of isolation and loneliness, 
a loss of coherent sense of self and separation from others. 
· Burnout: It is characterized by loss of feelings for one’s work, despair of improvising 
the situation and a poor quality of one’s life. A counsellor experiencing burnout may also feel 
unable to cope with personal tasks and may experience pervasive physical exhaustion 
(Fimian, 1987). Thus burnout means becoming emotionally and physically drained to the 
point that they cannot perform meaningfully. Therefore, a number of researchers like Boy and 
Pine, 1980 etc., suggest ways counsellors can avoid or treat burnout. Some of these ways are 
associating with healthy individuals; working with committed colleagues and with 
organizations that have a sense of mission; being reasonably committed to the theory of 
counselling; using stress reduction exercises; modifying environmental stresses; engaging in 
self assessment; periodically reviewing and clarifying counsellor’s role, expectations and 
beliefs; obtaining personal therapy; setting aside free and private time; maintaining an 
attitude of detached concern when working with clients and last but not the least, retaining an 
attitude of hope. 
27 
 
· Loss of freedom: Freedom here means feeling free from inside. Feeling free refers to 
having a sense of being in control of one’s actions and of not being determined by outside 
forces. It seems to be increasingly threatened by the stresses of modern life, by the demands 
of impersonal bureaucracies, by the pressure of work, by our own aspirations to savour life 
and our talents to the fullest; and even occasionally, by the claims made on us by those we 
have. 
The above mentioned variables directly threaten the counsellor’s professional efficacy and 
personal life style. In addition to these variables, the counsellor’s values also affect the 
process of counselling as the counsellor’s professional qualities are always coloured by 
personal values and perceptions. Different types of values are as follows: 
 · Cognitive values: States that one thing is better or worse than the other. For 
example, a counsellor may believe that behavioural counselling is more effective in working 
with stutterers than is Rogerian counselling. The more the individual believes that a particular 
value is a cognitive value, the less likely he or she is to change that value. 
 · Preference values: They are clearly not objective, but rather are indicative of 
a personal preference. Individuals holding preference values recognize that they are values 
and not facts thus they are more likely to tolerate in other values which are different from 
their own. 
 · Moral values:  They are based on higher principles of conduct. They are 
taught to us when we are very young and although we are able to modify what we have 
earned, many of the moral “ism” instilled within us hold throughout our lives. 
 · Self-values: These represent our feelings of self -esteem and self -importance. 
Although some sociologists argue that this value is culturally determined, a more popular 
position is that one’s self-esteem is more dependent upon early upbringing, particularly upon 
the relationship with one’s parents. In either case, one’s feelings about oneself deeply 
influence choices, perceptions and judgements. 
 · Cultural values:  These overlap the other four categories, but they differ in 
that they are shared social values rather than individual values. Cultural values are so subtle, 
they often elude our rational ability to evaluate and react objectively. 
 The counsellors like any other person have values in each of these categories, and 
these values together help constitute the counsellor’s world view and influence his or her 
counselling activities in manifold ways. In short, the effective counsellor has to be a well 
constructed, well balanced, fully functional mature adult, capable of integrating into himself 
or herself a myriad of values, problems and existential conflicts. 
 Counselling is a process that involves interpersonal relationships between a therapist 
and one or more clients by which the former employs psychological methods based on 
systematic knowledge of the human personality in attempting to improve mental health of the 
latter (Patterson, 1959). 
 Building a relationship, the first stage of counselling, is a continuous process. It 
begins by having the counsellor win the battle for structure and the client win the battle for 
initiative. Here the counsellor aims to create an atmosphere where the client is comfortable 
and not hesitate to share his thoughts, feelings and problems. 
28 
 
 Clients and counsellors some times have different perceptions about the purpose and 
nature of counselling. Clients often do not know what to expect from the process or how they 
should act (Riordan, Matheny and Harris, 1978). In order to help clients gain new directions 
in their lives, counsellors provide constructive guidelines or establish structure on the basis of 
their theoretical “orientation to counselling, the personalities of their clients and the major 
problem areas with which they will deal.” Practical guidelines like fee structure, time limit 
(such as 50 minute session), action limits (for the prevention of destructive behaviour), role 
limits (what will be expected of with participant) and procedural limits (in which the client is 
given the responsibility to work on specific goals or needs) are part of building structure 
(Brammer and Shostrom,1977; Goodyear and Bradley,1980; Kelly and Stone,1982). 
 Through confrontation, persuasion (Kerr, Claiborn and Dixon 1982; Senour, 1982), 
acceptance, patience, understanding and by anticipating ‘anger, frustration and defensiveness’ 
that some clients display (Ritchie, 1986) counsellors can motivate reluctant or resistant 
clients to change. Also Sack (1988) recommends the use of pragmatic techniques such as 
‘silence, reflection, questioning, describing, assessing, pretending and sharing the 
counsellor’s perspective as ways to overcome client resistance’. 
 Counselling may occur in any setting, but some circumstances are more likely than 
others to promote its development. For example, a comfortable and attractive room endowed 
with soft lightening, quiet colour, harmonious, comfortable furniture, and an absence of 
clutter and distraction (Bhertzer and Stane, 1980). 
 A distance of 30 to 39 inches between the counsellor and client (Haase, 1970) and 
chair of 90 degree angel from one another (Benjamin, 1981) promote counselling 
relationship. But comfort level is influenced by cultural background, gender and the nature of 
the relationship (Shatzer and Stone, 1980; Sidski, 1979). 
 The perception of clients and counsellors of one another is very important. Clients 
who are ‘young, attractive, verbal, intelligent and successful (YA VIS) (Schofield,1964)’ may 
be treated in a much more positive way than clients who are ‘homely, old, unintelligent, non -
verbal and disadvantaged (HOUND) (Allen, 1977)’. Clients are likely to work best with 
counsellors perceived as trustworthy, attractive and knowledgeable (Strong, 1968) and 
showing commitment (Carkhuff and Berenson, 1969). 
 Regardless of the external circumstances and the initial perceptions, a counsellor who 
attends to the verbal and nonverbal expressions of a client is more likely to establish rapport. 
The relationship may be further enhanced by the counsellor’s conveying of empathy and 
other helpful skills like re -statement and reflection. When counsellors are attuned to their 
own values and feelings, they are able to be even more effective. 
Check Your Progress 
 7. State any two dysfunctional reasons behind becoming a counsellor.  
 8. What should be the layout of a place for counselling?  
 
 
 
29 
 
1.6 Approaches to Counselling and Helping 
An analysis of a set of facts in relation to each other is better known as a ‘theory’ has an 
effect on how “client communication is conceptualized, new interpersonal relationships 
develop, how professional ethics are implemented, and how counsellor’s view themselves as 
professionals” (Corey, Neukrug, Mc Aulilife, Prate and Lovell, 1990). Without theoretical 
packing, counsellors’ operate haphazardly in a trial -and-error manner and risk being both 
ineffective and harmful. 
 According to Shostrom (1977) “theory helps to explain what happens in a counselling 
relationship and assists the counsellor in predicting, evaluating, and improving results. It 
provides a framework for making scientific observation about counselling. Theorizing 
encourages the coherence of ideas about counselling and the production of new ideas.” 
Hence, counselling theory can be very practical in the sense that they help to make sense of 
the counsellor’s observation in work and thus provide direction. 
Boy and Fine (1983) further state that theory is the why behind the how of counsellor roles. It 
provides a framework within which a counsellor can operate. Boy and Fine have given the 
following six functions of theory that make counselling practical: 
· Theory helps counsellors find unity and relatedness within the diversity of 
existence. 
· Theory compels counsellors to examine relationships they could otherwise 
overlook. 
· Theory gives counsellors operational guidelines by which to work and helps 
them in evaluating their development as professionals. 
· Theory helps counsellors focus on relevant data and tells them what to look 
for. 
· Theory helps counsellors assist clients in the effective modification of their 
behaviour. 
· Theory helps counsellors evaluate both old and new approaches to the process 
of counselling. It is the base from which new counselling approaches are 
constructed. 
 The ultimate criterion for all counselling theories is how well they provide 
explanations of what occurs in counselling (Kelly,1988) and to what degree they organize 
information which is grounded in the reality of people’s lives (Young,1988). 
 In short, an effective counsellor decides which theory or theories and methods to use 
on the basis of educational background, philosophy, and the needs of the clients. All 
approaches are not appropriate for all counsellors or clients, but a theoretical base is very 
important for every effective counsellor. 
1.6.1 Psychodynamic Counselling 
Some of the proponents of psychodynamic counselling are discussed here.  
 
30 
 
Sigmund Freud 
Freud was the creator of the psychoanalytic approach. The Freudian view of human nature is 
essentially pessimistic, deterministic, mechanistic, and reductionalistic. According to Freud, 
‘human beings are determined by irrational forces, unconscious motivations, biological and 
instinctual needs and drives, and psychosexual events (stages) during the first five years of 
life’. 
Humans are viewed as energy system. According to the orthodox Freudian view, “the 
dynamics of personality consist of the ways in which psychic energy is distributed to the id, 
ego, and superego. Since the amount of energy is limited, one system gains control over the 
available energy at the expense of the other two systems. Behaviour is determined by this 
psychic energy.” 
Freud also emphasized the role of instinct. All instincts are innate and biological. Freud 
stressed the sexual instincts and the aggressive impulses. He saw all human behaviour as 
determined by the desire to gain pleasure and avoid pain. Humans have both life instincts 
(Eros), and death instincts (Thanatos). According to Freud, ‘the goal of all life is death; life is 
but a roundabout way to death’. 
The primary goal of analytic therapy is to reform the individual’s character structure by 
making the unconscious (repressed memories and wishes), conscious in the client. The 
therapeutic process focuses on re -living childhood experiences and assisting the client is 
working through a developmental stage not previously resolved. Past experiences are re -
structured, discussed, analyzed, and interpreted with the aim of personality reconstruction. 
These goals of psychoanalysis, which vary according to the client, focus mainly on personal 
adjustment, usually including a reorganization of internal focuses within the person and 
stresses environmental adjustment, especially in the areas of work and intimacy. 
A final goal of psychoanalysis is helping clients cope with the demands of the society in 
which they live by strengthening the ego so that perceptions and plans become more realistic. 
To accomplish these goals the psychoanalysts function as experts. They encourage their 
clients to talk about whatever comes to their mind, especially about childhood experiences. 
The therapist remains anonymous and engages in very little sharing of his or her own feelings 
and experiences, so that the client projects onto the analyst. The client’s projections are 
interpreted and analyzed. 
To create an atmosphere in which the client feels free to express difficult thoughts, the 
psychoanalyst after a few ‘face -to-face’ sessions, often has the client lie down on a couch 
while he/she remains out of view (usually seated behind the client’s head). The analyst listens 
for ‘gaps and inconsistencies in the client’s story, infers the meaning of the client’s reported 
dreams and free associations, carefully observes the client during the therapy session, and 
remains sensitive to clues concerning the client’s feelings toward the analyst’. 
The analyst’s role is to let clients gain insight by re -living and working through the 
unresolved past experiences that come into focus during sessions. The development of 
transference is encouraged to help client deal realistically with unconscious material. ‘The 
analyst becomes a current substitute for significant others in the client’s life’. The analyst 
pays particular attention to the resistance of the client and interprets it for the client. 
31 
 
The analyst is concerned mainly with assisting the client in gaining awareness of self, 
honestly and more effective personal relationships, in dealing with anxiety realistically and in 
gaining control over impulsive and irrational behaviour. The analyst is expected to be 
relatively objective as he or she receives the anger, love, adulation, criticism, and other 
intense feelings of the client. 
During therapy the client progresses, through certain stages —developing a growing 
relationship with the analyst, experiencing treatment crisis, gaining insight into his or her past 
and unconscious, developing resistance to learning more about himself or herself, developing 
a transference relationship with the analyst, deepening the therapy, ‘working through’ the 
resistance and uncovered material, and termination of therapy. ‘The client must be willing to 
commit himself or herself to an intensive and long -term therapy process’. Typically, a client 
comes to therapy several times weekly for a period of three to five years. The session usually 
last an hour. The client is typically ‘asked not to make any radical changes in his or her 
lifestyle during the period of analysis’. 
Overall, the counsellor employs both active and passive techniques. The following are five 
most prominent psychoanalytic techniques: 
 · Free association: Is a method of revealing past experiences and of 
discharging the emotions associated with past traumatic situations. This is known as 
catharsis. The client is instructed by the analyst to clear his or her mind of day -to-day 
thoughts and preoccupations and to say whatever comes to mind, regardless of how painful, 
silly, trivial, illogical, or irrelevant it may be. 
 · Dream analysis:  Freud saw dream analysis as ‘the royal road to the 
unconscious’, —he believed that in dreams the unconscious wishes, needs, and fears are 
expressed. The counsellor is especially sensitive to two aspects of any dream —the manifest 
content (obvious and apparent meaning) and the latent content (hidden but true meaning). 
 · Analysis of resistance: Client’s resistance to therapeutic process may take 
many forms, such as, missing appointments, being late for appointments, not paying fees, 
persisting in transference, blocking thoughts during free association, or refusing to recall 
dreams or early memories. The analysts interpretation of the resistance is aimed at helping the 
client become aware of the reasons for the resistance so that he or she can deal with them. 
 · Analysis of transference:  The analyst encourages the transference neurosis 
by his or her neutrality, objectivity, anonymity, and relative passivity. Interpretation of the 
transference relationship enables the client to work through old conflicts that keep him or her 
presently fixated and that retard his or her emotional growth. In essence, the 
psychopathological effects of an undesirable early relationship are neutralized by working 
through a similar emotional conflict in the therapeutic relationship with the analyst. 
 · Interpretation: Encompasses explanations and analysis of a client’s thoughts, 
feelings, and actions.  The analyst points out, explains, and even teaches the client the 
meaning of the behaviour that is manifested by dreams, free association, resistances, and the 
therapeutic relationship itself. 
In addition, to the above -mentioned techniques, psychological assessment instruments, 
especially projective tests, are often employed. Psychoanalytic counsellors also use 
32 
 
diagnostic labels to help themselves classify clients and to develop appropriate treatment 
plans for them. 
But psychoanalysis has often been minimized as a technique applicable to the counselling 
setting. Its critics argue that it places too much emphasis on sexuality and early childhood 
experiences; is quite time consuming and expensive; does not deal directly with the problem; 
brings to the surface more repressed material than is necessary; works for only certain kinds 
of clients (for example, does not work with clients older than fifty years); and has many 
concepts that are not easily communicated or understood. Also, its appropriateness for 
females continues to be questioned. 
Despite these criticisms, variation of the basic psychoanalytic techniques has several 
applications in counselling as follows: 
· Understanding the resistances that take the form of cancellation of 
appointments, fleeing from therapy prematurely and refusing to look at oneself  
· Understanding the value and role of transference that occurs in many 
counselling relationships 
· Understanding how overuse of ego defences can keep a person from 
functioning effectively and recognizing the ways these ego defences operate 
both in the counselling relationship itself and in the client’s daily life 
· Group and family counsellors are deeply influenced by its basic instincts into 
family dynamics and transference 
· Several psychological tests like Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), Rorschach 
Ink-blot Test, which are sometimes used in counselling settings are rooted in 
psychoanalytic theory. 
It seems to be effective in treating several disorders like hysteria, narcissism, obsessive 
compulsive disorder, anxiety, phobia, sexual difficulties etc. (Arlow, 1989). Its methods 
dream analysis, free association are extensively used and are valid till date. In short, this 
approach has grown and developed through the years and continues to evolve. 
Adler  
Adler’s psychology is also known as individual psychology as he focused on the evolution of 
a style of life and its effects upon individual behaviour. ‘Style of life’ is the  principle scheme 
governing the individual’s personality. It explains the uniqueness of the person. It is this 
uniqueness that departs Adler’s psychology from classical psychoanalysis. Adler considered 
each person to be a “unique configuration of motives, traits, interests, and values.” 
According to Adler, the inferiority feelings (fanaticized or real) stimulate every person to 
attain the same goal of superiority. Different people adopt different ways to attain this goal 
which forms one’s style of life. This style of life determines how a person confronts the three 
life problems of adulthood, namely —social relations, occupation, love, and marriage. He 
described four different styles of life, each conceptualized in terms of the degree of social 
interest and activity, as given below: 
33 
 
 · The ruling type:  Refers to the style of life in which an individual is high in 
activity but low in social interest. Such people attempt to deal with life problems by 
dominating them. It corresponds to Hippocrates choleric type of personality. 
 · The getting type:  Refers to individuals who expect to be given everything 
they desire for. These individuals are low in social interest and activity. This type corresponds 
to Hippocrates phlegmatic type of personality. 
 · The avoiding type:  Refers to individuals who try to avoid defeat in life’s 
problems by avoiding the problems themselves. These individuals are also low in social 
interest and activity. It corresponds to Hippocrates melancholic type of personality. 
 · The socially useful type : Refers to those individuals who exhibit activity in 
the service of others. Such people confront the life tasks and attempt to resolve them in a 
manner consistent with the needs of other individuals. It corresponds to Hippocrates sanguine 
type of personality. 
Contrary to Freud, Adler theorized that the style of life is formed very early in childhood—by 
the age of four or five— and from there on experiences are assimilated and utilized according 
to this unique style of life. Attitudes, feelings, and apperceptions  become fixed and 
mechanized at an early age and thereafter it is almost impossible for the style of life to 
change albeit the ways of expressing them may change. 
Adler further believed that specific inferiorities, either imagined or real, that the person has, 
determines the style of life is. By the term inferiority Adler meant organ defectiveness or 
psychological or social disabilities. For instance, “Napoleon’s conquering style of life was 
determined by his slight physical stature, and Hitler’s craving for world domination was 
determined by his sexual impotence.” 
He observed that the person with a defective organ often tries to compensate for the weakness 
by strengthening it through intensive training. He equated inferiority with unmanliness or 
feminity, the compensation for which was called the ‘masculine protest’. Later he stated that 
feelings of inferiority arise from a sense of incompletion or imperfection in any sphere of life. 
He contended that inferiority feelings are not a sign of abnormality; they are the cause of all 
improvement in the human lot. 
Although he believed that inferiority feelings were painful, but relief from these feelings was 
not always necessarily pleasurable. Perfection not pleasure was for him the goal of life. 
Adler regarded social interest to be innate in nature and believed that humans were social 
creature by nature, not by habit. The aim is to attain a perfect society, which includes matters 
like cooperation, interpersonal and social relations, identification with the group, empathy, 
and so forth. 
He believed that people are embedded in a social context from their first day of life. For 
instance, cooperation manifests itself in the relationship between the infant and the mother, 
and thereafter the child is continuously involved in a network of interpersonal relations that 
shape the personality and provide concrete outlets for striving for superiority. Striving for 
superiority becomes socialized; the idea of a perfect society takes the place of purely personal 
ambition and selfish gain. By working for common good, humans compensate for their 
individual weakness. 
34 
 
Unlike Freud, Adler believed that expectations of the future rather than experiences of the 
past motivated human beings.  He perceived man as largely a conscious and a creative 
person, whose actions are strongly driven by what he expects for himself in future. He further 
stated that “humans are conscious beings and are usually aware of the reasons for their 
behaviour. They are conscious of their inferiorities and conscious of the goals for which they 
strive. More than that, humans are self-conscious individuals capable of planning and guiding 
their actions with full awareness of their meaning for their self-realizations.”  
Adler also gave the concept of the creative self, which refers to the self a person makes based 
on hereditary factors and life experiences. This creative self is responsible for giving meaning 
to life, forming the goals as well as the means to the goal. He further believed that the 
neurotic rigidly over -compensate for perceived inferiorities in an individual, that is people 
develop neurotic symptoms as a way of protecting themselves against their feelings of 
inferiority and soon this becomes a vicious cycle. 
When individuals are not able to deal with their problems of life, then in order to protect 
themselves they develop safeguards, which are analogous to Freudian defense mechanisms. 
Adler gave the following three general categories of safeguards: 
 · Excuses: refer to any attempt to avoid blame for failures in life. 
 · Aggression: refers to blaming self or others for failures. 
· Distancing: includes procrastination, claims of helplessness or attempts to 
avoid problems 
Adler believed that complexes characterize the individual as schemata or personalities traits 
do. The various complexes given by him are as follows: 
· Inferiority complex:  refers to feelings of being significantly inferior from 
others. 
· Superiority complex: refers to feelings of being significantly superior from 
others. 
 · Redeemer complex: represents desire to save someone. 
 · Proof complex: refers to the fear of failure and the desire to be always right. 
 · Predestination complex:  refers to the belief that whatever happens to an 
individual is inevitable. 
Adler believed that the body has its own language known as the ‘organ dialect’. For instance, 
he considered enuresis as an expression of hostility to parents or a means of attracting their 
attention. Similarly insomnia was seen by him as an expression of ambition. Organic 
disorders usually express the craving for power. Along similar lines Adler believed that each 
emotion has its own somatic expression and the choice of the organ usually depends upon the 
individual’s childhood experiences subordinated to his/her craving for overcoming his/her 
feelings of inferiority. For example, a healthy individual may desire to become sick of the 
illness could bring him/her more superiority than health does. 
35 
 
Adler further believed that there is a constant reciprocal influence between the body and the 
mind. The style of life can exert a permanent influence on the somatic development of the 
individual. 
Adler concluded that the position within the family (such as eldest child, second child, or the 
youngest child) is extremely important in determining how an individual deals with reality, 
that is, what would be his/her style of life. The first -born or the eldest child is gets plenty of 
attention until the second child is born; then suddenly with arrival of the second child, the 
first one has to quit his/her favoured position and has to share his/her parent’s affections with 
the new baby. This experience may affect the eldest child in various ways, —he or she may 
start hating people thereby protecting him or herself against sudden reversal of fortune and 
feeling of insecurity. Eldest children are also likely to take an interest in the past, when they 
were the centre of attention. Neurotics, criminals, drunkards, and perverts, are often first born 
children, as per Adler’s observation. The eldest child is more likely to develop into a 
responsible, protective person if the parents handle the situation wisely by preparing him/her 
for the appearance of their sibling. 
The second or middle child is usually ambitious as he/she is constantly trying to surpass its 
elder siblings. He/she also tends to be more rebellious and envious but by and large is better 
adjusted than either the elder or younger sibling. 
The youngest child is usually the ‘spoiled’ child. Next to the eldest child he/she is more likely 
to become a ‘problem’ child and a neurotic maladjusted adult. 
Historically, research has not been able to demonstrate any consistent pattern correlated with 
birth order. Recent studies (Becker and Carrol, 1962; Stotland and Cottrell, 1961; Stotland 
and Dunn, 1962,1963; Stotland and Walsh, 1963) have reported personality constellations 
correlated with birth order, but these patterns are the result of empirical investigations, and 
there is to necessary relationship with Adler’s predictions. 
Some of the major criticisms of Adler’s psychology are as follows: 
· Adler’s approach has been criticized on the grounds that Adler believed that 
general sociability is innate. But research shows that this sociability can be 
taught, fostered and improved. 
· Adler believed that the goal of superiority was the governing principle. Many 
researchers question superiority as the governing principle of mental life 
· Adler’s work left several questions unanswered —What is the creative force? 
Why does it become goal directed? How does it involve heredity and 
environment? Why don’t people become reconciled to their feelings of 
inferiority? Are all people striving for superiority? Do experimental and 
clinical studies bring evidence in support of the generality of inferiority 
feelings and the drive towards superiority?    
Some of the major contributions of Adler are as follows: 
· Adler helped to shift the focus of psychodynamic theory from the id to the 
ego. 
36 
 
· Adler  helped patient’s change their illogical, mistaken ideas and expectations 
in the belief that to feel and behave better, one has first to think more rationally, an 
approach that anticipated contemporary developments in Cognitive Behaviour 
Therapy (CBT). Adler’s interest in growth, in the prevention of problems, and the 
betterment of society influenced the development of child guidance centres and parent 
education.   
· Adler’s most important contribution, however, was his concern with the social 
context of personality. Psychological disturbance, he claimed, has its roots not so 
much in early childhood experiences as in people’s present circumstances, particularly 
their relationships with others. 
1.6.2 Humanistic Counselling 
Existential and humanistic approaches have the following main characteristics: 
· They focus on the primacy of affect as a cause of and / or contributor to the 
development of certain human actions and reactions (Zojone, 1984). 
· They stress helping clients cope with or change their emotions as a premise for 
making other life alternations. 
· They emphasize human phenomenology and how a person’s views of the 
environment affect behaviour. 
· They emphasize the client -counsellor relationship more than the specific 
techniques in bringing about a change in the client (Baruth and Huber,1985). 
 · They focus on the unique growth and development within each individual. 
· The existential -humanistic approaches also emphasize the philosophical 
concerns of what it means to become fully human. 
Humanistic psychotherapy evolved, both in Europe and in US, as a reaction to the 
determinism of psychoanalysis and to the mechanism of the behavioural psychologies. 
Although several people like Soren A. Kierkegard (1813 -1855) (Father Figure of this 
movement), Paul Tillich (1886 -1965), Martin Heidegger (1889), Jean Paul Sartre (1905 -
1980), Eugene Minkowski (1855), Ludwig Binswanger (1981) etc. played an important role 
in the formulation of this school, but Rollo -May (1909) and Viktor E. Frankl (1906) have 
contributed the most to psychotherapy and counselling. 
The term ‘logotherapy’ was used by Frankl as early as 1938. ‘Logo’ is derived from Greek 
which denotes ‘finding meaning’. The impact of the concentration camps crystallized 
Frankl’s thoughts about the meaning of life and suffering, and it was partly his determination 
to shave his beliefs that kept him alive. 
According to Frankl (1962), the ‘meaning of life always changes’ but it never ceases to be. 
One can discover life’s meaning in three ways: 
 · By doing a deed, i.e. by achieving or accomplishing something 
 · By experiencing a value, such as a work of nature, culture, or love 
37 
 
 · By suffering, i.e. by finding a proper attitude towards unalterable fate 
Some of the key concepts of humanistic-existential approach are as follows: 
· Existence precedes essence: i.e. what a person does with his or her life 
determines what and who one is. 
· Human beings are capable of self awareness. An individual is free to choose 
and is responsible for the consequences of his or her choices— the existence. 
· One’s life is always lived with a view – toward death. One’s authenticity 
derives from one’s own ability to be aware of this and to courageously 
confront our existence. 
· An individual’s existence is never completely separate from the existence of 
others and the world and the existence of the world is never completely 
separate from his existence. 
· Perception is more valid when we try to understand another person from his or 
her subjective point of new (phenomenology).  
· Existential anxiety results from the awareness of being finite and from facing 
the inevitable prospects of eventual death (non-being).  
· Normal anxiety occurs when an individual feels helpless in a specific 
situation. It is natural for everyone to experience existential neurotic anxiety 
which stems from deeper maladjustments. May (1977) argues that normal 
anxiety may be healthy and motivational and can help people change.  
· Existential guilt  is the result of failing to fully become what one is able to 
become.  
· Human are relational beings who strive towards discovering a purpose in life 
and creating values that will give substance to living. Failure to create 
meaningful relationships results in conditions such as isolation, 
depersonalization, alleviation, estrangement and loneliness. The human being 
strives for self-actualization. 
· Pathology is viewed as a failure to use freedom to actualize one’s potential i.e., 
it is a failure to make meaningful choices and to maximize one’s potential.  
The therapeutic process involved in existential-humanistic approach is as follows: 
· Therapeutic goals: the existential counsellor’s primary goal is to understand 
the client or as a person, a being and as a being -in-the-world. Existential 
therapy aims at heaving clients experiences their existences as authentic by  
 (1) Becoming aware of their own existence and potentials 
 (2) By becoming aware of how they can open up  
 (3) Act on that potential 
38 
 
According to Bugental (1985), authenticity is defined as a central concern of psychotherapy 
and the primary existential value. Basically, the goal of existential therapy is to expand self -
awareness and thus increase choice potentials to live an authentic life i.e. to become free and 
to be responsible for the direction of one’s life. Existential therapy also aims at “helping 
clients face the anxiety of choosing for themselves and accepting the reality that they are 
more than mere victims of deterministic forces outside themselves.” 
 · Role of the counsellor:  Basically, counsellors concentrate on being authentic 
with their clients and entering into deep and personal relationship with them for which the 
counsellor sometimes shares personal experiences with the client, thereby helping a client 
realize a shaved humanness and struggle.  
  Buhler and Allen (1972), suggest that existential counsellors focus on person 
to person relationships that emphasize mutuality, wholeness, and growth. The counsellor 
serves as a model in the relationship for ways to achieve individual potential and make 
decisions. The counsellor concentrates on helping the client experience current subjective 
feelings, gain clearer self-understanding and move towards the establishment of a new way of 
being in the world. “The focus is on living productively in the present and not recovering a 
personal past.” (May and Yalom, 1989). 
 · The client’s experience in therapy In existential therapy clients are able to 
experience subjectively their perceptions of their worlds. They must be active in the 
therapeutic process, for they must decide what fears, guilt and anxieties they will explore.  
  In essence, clients in existential therapy are engaged in opening the doors to 
themselves and this experience is often frightening, or exciting, or joyful or depressing or a 
combination of all of these.  
  Gradually, they become aware of what they have been and who they now are, 
and they are better able to decide what kind of future they want, through the process of their 
therapy, they can explore alternatives for making their visions become real.  
 · Existential techniques: Kemp (1971) points out that in existential 
counselling, ‘technique follows understanding’. Thus, existential techniques are free to use 
techniques as widely diversified as desensitization and free association or to dissociate 
themselves from these practices entirely (Corey,1991). Confrontation is also used by the 
therapist. Clients areconfronted with the idea that each one of us is responsible for our own 
life. 
Frankl (1967) discusses an important technique which he calls ‘paradoxical intention’, i.e. the 
counsellor tells the client to wish for their worst fears, attempt to do them, or think intensely 
about them. For instance, a phobic patient who had a fear of sweating and was encouraged by 
the therapist to show people whom he met, how much he was able to sweat. As a result, 
whenever he met someone who aroused anxiety, he tended to tell himself that now he would 
sweat at least ten litres and by doing so, he was eventually relieved of his fear. 
Some techniques such as imagery exercises, awareness exercises, and goal setting activities 
are borrowed from other models. For example, by using Eugene Gendlin’s focusing approach 
(Gendlin 1981), individual are encouraged to discover and change the deepest feelings within 
themselves by discovering what he calls their felt sense. By focusing on a different aspect of 
39 
 
one’s experience, an individual can learn to interpret and react to inner feelings which were 
previously beyond the realm of awareness and change. 
In short, the existential point of view has rightly focused on the basic conflict of human 
nature—the kind of ambivalence that results in inaction or renunciation of freedom. In 
practice, existential counselling does not appear to apply to the common conflicting problems 
of human beings. 
Evaluation of existential-humanistic approach 
Some of the criticisms of the existential approach to therapeutic practices are as follows: 
• It revolutionized the profession of counselling by linking counselling with 
psychotherapy. 
• This approach has generated a great amount of research and initially set the standard for 
doing research on the counselling variables. In fact, Roger was the first practitioner to 
make audiotape recordings of the counselling sessions. 
• According to Grummon (1972), the person -centred approach is effective as it helps 
improve psychological adjustment, learning and frustration tolerance and helps 
decrease defensiveness. 
• The approach focuses on the importance of an open client -counsellor relationship and 
the short term nature of the process. 
• It emphasizes that the client and not the counsellor is the centre or the focus of the 
counselling process and therefore the initiative to overcome the problems should come 
from the client itself. 
• It emphasizes the importance of the counselling relationship in facilitating change. 
• It also stresses the counsellor’s attitude than the technique used by him/her in making 
the therapeutic relationship effective. 
• The approach takes a relatively short time to learn and lays emphasis on mastering the 
listening skills. In this regard, it forms the basis for training many paraprofessional 
helpers. 
• It also adopts a positive view of human nature and believes that people can change and 
it thus emphasises the change process. 
• Although these are some justifiable grounds on which to criticize, the Humanistic - 
Existential approach does emphasize unique aspects that the other therapeutic 
approaches ignore. For example, its emphasis the following aspects: 
• It focuses on human nature and emphasizes the uniqueness of each individual. 
• It emphasis the importance of the therapist-client relationship 
• It believes that the client has the freedom to decide his or her own destiny. 
• It provides a philosophy on which, the therapeutic practice is based. 
40 
 
• This approach places the person into central focus.  
• It focuses sharply on the central facts of human existence, self consciousness, and the 
consequent freedom.  
• It sees death in a positive light by postulating that death gives life its meaning.  
• This approach has contributed a new dimension to the understanding of anxiety, guilt, 
frustration, loneliness and alienation, as it states that anxiety is not necessarily a 
negative condition. It sees anxiety as a part of human life and can motivate some 
individuals to make healthy and productive decisions. 
• This approach lays stress “on continued human growth and development and offers 
hope to the clients through directed readings and therapeutic encounters with the 
counsellor.” 
• This approach is also effective in some cross -cultural counselling situations because its 
global view of human existence allows counsellors to focus on the person the client is 
irrespective of his social background (Jackson, 1987). 
• In addition, this approach provides a sound philosophical base on which to build a 
personal and unique style of the practice of therapy because of it addresses itself to the 
core struggles of the contemporary person. 
• In short, this approach has both its positive and negative components. On one hand it 
has certain lofty and abstract concepts in existentialism that are often difficult to grasp 
and then more difficult to apply in practice. On the other hand, it has much to offer 
clients who function psychologically and socially at a relatively high level. However, 
this approach is severely limited in its applicability to clients who function at low 
levels, to client in crisis states and to clients in poverty conditions as, clients who 
struggle to meet their basic survival needs are really not that interested in self -
actualization or in the existential meaning of life. 
1.6.3 Transactional Analysis 
Transactional analysis is an optimistic theory, which was formulated by Eric Berne in the 
early 1960s. Its basic assumption is that people can change despite any unfortunate events of 
the past. It believes that people have choices in their lives. In this sense, this approach is also 
anti-deterministic in nature. 
James and Jongeward (1971) emphasize that, ‘transactional analysis is a rational approach to 
understanding behavior and is based on the assumption that all individuals can learn to trust 
themselves, think for themselves, make their own decisions, and express their feelings”. 
It focuses on four major methods of understanding and predicting human behaviour as 
follows: 
• Structural analysis: It refers to understanding what is happening within the 
individual. 
• Transactional analysis: It refers to describing what happens between two or 
more people. 
41 
 
• Game analysis:  It refers to understanding transactions between individuals 
that led to bad feelings. 
• Script analysis:  It refers to understanding the life plan that an individual is 
following. 
Structural analysis 
There are  three functional ego states —child, parent and adult of each person. According to 
Berne (1964) “an ego state refers to a consistent pattern of feelings and experiences directly 
related to a corresponding consistent pattern of behaviour.” 
The first to develop is the child ego state. It is that part of the personality which is 
characterized by childlike behaviours and feelings such as inquisitiveness, affection, 
selfishness, meanness, playfulness and manipulation. The child ego state consists of two 
subdivisions the natural (free) child and the adaptive child. The natural child is the part of the 
person that is spontaneous, impulsive, feeling oriented, often self -centered and pleasure 
loving. The natural child is also intuitive, creative, and responsive to non -verbal messages. 
The adaptive child refers to the compliant part of the personality that conforms to the wishes 
and demands of parental figures. These adaptations of natural impulses occur in response to 
traumas, natural life experiences, and training. 
The parental ego state incorporates the attitudes and behaviours (the ‘do’s’, ‘should’s’, and 
‘ought’s’ ) of the parental figures. Outwardly, these messages are expressed through 
prejudice, criticism, and nurturing behavior. Parental messages are present throughout a 
person’s life. It is believed that a response to any thoughtful question that occurs within ten 
seconds  usually comes from the parent ego state. Like the child ego state, the parent ego 
state also consists of two subdivisions, namely: the nurturing parent and the critical parent. 
The nurturing parent is the part of the person that comforts, praises, and aids others, whereas 
the part of the person that finds fault, displays prejudices, disapproves, and prevents others 
from feeling good about themselves is the critical parent. These two parts of the parent are 
recognized through non -verbal behaviours such as pointing a finger at someone and verbal 
statements such as ‘that’s too bad, but don’t worry’ etc. 
The adult ego state is not subdivided according to a person’s age, nor does it have any 
relation to it. It is the objective, thinking, data -gathering part of the person. The adult ego 
state tests reality, is rational and organized. It expresses itself through phrases such as ‘I 
understand’ and ‘I am going to’. 
Sometimes the different ego states operate simultaneously. The transactional analysis aims to 
first identify or determine the ego state a person is frequently using in most of his or her 
dealings and situations. Thereafter it aims to help the client to be able to balance responses 
from different ego states when necessary and appropriate. 
Transactional analysis (TA) 
The second way of understanding and predicting human behaviour involves diagramming 
ego states transactions. Transactions may occur on one of three levels: complementary, 
crossed, or ulterior. In complementary transactions, the activated ego state produces an 
expected response. For example, a parent to parent transaction can be more nurturing or 
42 
 
critical. In a crossed transaction, an inappropriate ego state is activated, producing an 
unexpected response. Such transactions are often painful and people engaged in such 
transactions tend to withdraw from each other or switch topics. An ulterior transaction is one 
in which two ego states operate simultaneously and one message disguises the others. 
Ulterior transactions appear to be complementary and socially acceptable even though they 
are not.  
Game analysis 
Games are ulteriorly motivated transactions that appear complementary on the surface but 
end in bad feelings. People play games to structure time, achieve recognition, make others 
predictable, and prevent intimacy. Since intimacy involves risks, therefore games keep people 
safe from exposing their thoughts and feelings. There are first -degree, second -degree, and 
third-degree games and all have predictable ends. 
First-degree games are played in social circles with anyone who is willing to participate. 
They generally lead to mild upsets. The second -degree games usually occur in more intimate 
circles and involve bigger risks. People involved in these games often end up with bad 
feelings. A third -degree game usually involves tissue or physical damage (for example 
fighting etc.); and the players end up in jail, the hospital, or the morgue. According to Berne 
(1964), most games carry the danger of causing permanent damage but only few games have 
a positive or neutral outcome; as during games people avoid meaningful and healthy human 
interactions. 
Individuals who play games operate from one of three positions: victim, persecutor, or 
rescuer (Karpman, 1968). To keep games going there is often a switch -off where people 
assume new roles.  
Script analysis 
Berne believed that everyone makes a life script, or life plan, early in childhood —by the age 
of five. These scripts are often based on one’s interpretations of external events and they 
determine how one interacts with others. Positive messages received as a child form the basis 
for constructive scripts, whereas negative messages are more powerful and may become the 
basis for destructive scripts.  
A life script involves the ability to get strokes (verbal or physical recognition) for certain 
behaviour. Most life scripts revolve around giving and receiving ‘strokes’. Berne points out 
that negative strokes (punishment) are better than no strokes at all (being ignored). Strokes 
result in the collection of either good or bad feelings, known as ‘stamps’. When individuals 
collect enough stamps, these feelings are then frequently reflected in terms of their 
behaviours. Healthy people give and receive positive strokes most often. 
Below are given some common negative script patterns: 
• Never scripts: a person never gets to do what he or she wants because the 
parent forbids it. 
• Until scripts: a person must wait until a certain time to do something before he 
or she can have a reward. 
43 
 
• Always scripts: a person tells himself or herself that it is necessary to continue 
doing the same thing. 
• After scripts: difficulty is expected after a certain event. 
• Open-ended scripts: a person has no idea what he/she is supposed to do after a 
given time. 
There are also mini-scripts within people’s lives that focus on minute-by-minute occurrences. 
Some of the most common mini -scripts are ‘be perfect,’ ‘be strong’, ‘hurry up’, ‘try hard’, 
‘please someone’. These five messages, called drivers, allow people to temporarily escape 
their life scripts. 
The ideal life script in TA is expressed as the position that I’m ok: you’re ok (a ‘get -on-with’ 
position) (Harris, 1967). But people may operate from three other positions too, that is; I’m 
ok; you’re not ok (a ‘get -away-from’ position); I’m not ok: you’re ok (a ‘get -nowhere-with’ 
position): and I’m not ok (a ‘get-rid-of’ position).”  
Everyone operates from each of these four positions at various times in their lives. But well -
functioning individuals learn to recognize unhealthy positions and modify thoughts and 
behaviours accordingly. According to Berne, life scripts can be rewritten if a person becomes 
more conscious of what he or she is thinking and makes sincere efforts to change. 
Role of the counsellor 
In TA the initial role of a counsellor is of being a teacher, where the counsellor begins by first 
explaining to the client the language and concepts of TA, as a new way of thinking about self. 
Then the counsellor contracts with the client for specific changes and helps the person 
achieve them by developing the necessary skills needed to bring about the constructive 
changes (Corey, 1991). 
TA counsellors do not rely heavily on formal psychological tests but instead assess the client 
functioning through an egogram or another less formal method. The purpose is to determine 
how a client is spending time and from which ego states he or she is operating.  
Goals 
The primary goal of TA is to help people transform their life in order to attain health and 
autonomy. Counsellors generally help their clients to identify and restore distorted or 
damaged ego-states, to develop the capacity to use all ego states,  to use the adult ego state 
with its reasoning powers, to alter inappropriate life scripts, and to adopt a position of ‘I’m 
ok; you’re ok’ (Berne, 1966). 
In the process of becoming autonomous, clients exhibit more awareness, intimacy, and 
spontaneity; become free of games; and eliminate self -defeating scripts. They become more 
in touch with their past but, at the same time, are freed from previous negative influences. A 
major emphasis of TA is on learning about the self in order to decide what one wishes to 
become (Goulding & Goulding, 1979). 
 
 
44 
 
Techniques 
There are several techniques used in TA to achieve the above-mentioned goals such as 
‘structural analysis, transactional analysis, game analysis, and script analysis’. Some other 
techniques that are also used in this regard are as follows: 
Treatment contract: refers to a specific, concrete contract that emphasizes agreed upon 
responsibilities for both counsellors and clients (Dusay and Dusay, 1989). The treatment 
contract tells both the client and counsellor when counselling goals have been achieved. 
Interrogation: involves speaking to a client’s ego state until the counsellors receives an adult 
response. This technique should be used carefully as when not used properly, it can be 
ineffective. 
Specification: refers to identification of the ego state that initiated a transaction. 
Specification takes place from the adult ego state of both client and counsellor. 
Confrontation: involves the counsellor’s pointing out inconsistencies in the client’s 
behaviour and speech.  
Explanation: occurs on an adult -to-adult ego state level. The counsellor teaches the client 
about some aspects of TA. 
Illustration: enlightens the client or elaborates a point through the use of story. 
Confirmation: is used when previously modified behaviour occurs again and the counsellor 
points this out to the client. Only when the client has a firmly established adult ego state can 
this technique be effective. 
Interpretation: involves the counsellor’s explaining to the child ego state of the client the 
reasons for the client’s behaviour. This technique is mainly a psychodynamic procedure and 
is used only when the client has an effectively functioning adult ego state. 
Crystallization: consists of an adult -to-adult transaction in which the client comes to an 
awareness that individual game playing may be given up if so desired. 
Almost all the techniques in TA involve some combination of questioning, confrontation and 
dialogue. The following are among the questions most frequently asked by TA counsellors: 
 · What are the nicest and worst things your parents ever said to you? 
 · What is your earliest memory? 
· What is the family story about your birth? What is your favourite fairy tale, 
story, or song? 
 · How would you describe your mother and father?  
 · How long do you expect to live? 
To be most effective, a TA counselor must always be careful to assess the ego strengths of 
individual clients. He/she should always keep in his/her mind that a client is usually capable 
of making new decisions about life once he or she discovers different aspects of the self. 
 
45 
 
Evaluation 
The major strengths of TA are as follows: 
· The approach uses terms that are easily understood and are clearly defined 
hence it can be used in a number of settings and with varied population. 
· This approach can be easily and effectively combined with other action-
oriented counselling theories. 
 · This approach puts the responsibility for change on the client. 
 · The approach is goal-directed. 
It has certain limitations too. Some being 
 · It has been criticized for its primary cognitive orientation. 
 · It has been criticized for its simplicity, structure and popularity. 
 · This approach lacks adequate research 
Unfortunately, this approach has not developed much since Berne’s death in 1970. 
1.6.4 Behavioural Counselling 
The behavioural counselling approach believes that emotional, learning and adjustment 
difficulties can be treated through a variety of prescriptive, mechanical, usually non-dynamic, 
techniques and procedures. It involves the “systematic application of principle of learning to 
change maladaptive behaviour toward more adaptive ways (Krumboltz,1966).” 
The behavioural approaches encompass within them a wide variety of ideas, practices and 
theories. At one end of this continuum are behaviourists like Skinner who largely employ 
learning principals to modify behaviour without taking into account the underlying thoughts. 
On the other end of the continuum are researchers like Donald Meichenbaum (1977) and 
Aaron Beck (1976) who emphasize the importance of mental processes in human behavior 
and view thoughts as a type of behaviour. However, it is John Krumboltz (1966) who is 
known to popularize behaviourism in counselling. 
According to Cormier and Hackney (1987), clients who appear to improve successfully using 
behavioural counseling are: 
 · Predominantly goal-oriented and have a need for achievement and results. 
 · Action-oriented with a need to do something 
· Interested in changing either a discrete response or a limited number of 
behaviours. 
In general, behaviour counsellors see human beings as essentially shaped and determined by 
their socio-cultural environment. They concentrate on processes closely associated with overt 
behaviour and focus on ‘here and now’ as opposed to the ‘then and there’ of behaviour. They 
believe that all behaviour -—adaptive and maladaptive is learnt, hence unhealthy behaviours 
can also be modified using learning principles. They focus on setting well -defined therapy 
goals for clients and reject the idea that the human personality is composed of traits. They 
46 
 
further stress the importance of obtaining empirical evidence and scientific support for any 
technique used. 
In general, behaviourists believe learning and thus development occurs in one of the three 
following ways: 
1. Respondent learning: Formulated by Ivan Pavlov. According to this learning occurs 
through the association of two stimuli. Many human emotions, such as phobias, arise because 
of paired associations. For example, a person may have an accident after eating a certain 
food. The association of the food with the accident, even through the two are unrelated, may 
result in that person’s eventual fear or avoidance of the food. Thus, people often associate 
feelings with certain events and vice versa. The sound of music, the smell of certain odors, 
the sight of certain colors, and the touch of a stranger are experiences that individual may 
react to emotionally because of respondent learning. People need not be actively involved 
with environment forces for learning to occur. Once learned, these associations can be 
unlearned, with new ones taking their place, a process known as counter-conditioning. 
2. Operant conditioning: Formulated by B.F. Skinner, who believed that when a certain 
behaviour is followed closely by a reinforcer (a reward), chances that the behaviour will 
occur in similar and identical circumstances increase. Thus, individual’s behaviour can be 
shaped through rewards and punishments. 
3. Social modeling:  Formulated by Albert Bandura (1977), who believed that most 
learning is a result of copying or imitating. Thus, according to social modelling, people 
acquire new knowledge and behaviour by observing other people and events without 
engaging in the behavior themselves and without any direct consequences to themselves 
(Bandura, 1977). Learning through social modelling also emphasize the self -regulation of 
behaviour and thus states that learning may occur independently of reinforcement 
(Hergeuhahn, 1984). 
Characteristics of behaviour therapy 
The key characteristics of behaviour therapy are that it focuses on overt and specific 
behaviour or behaviours; has well defined specific treatment goals; formulates a specific 
treatment procedure appropriate to a particular problem and does an objective assessment of 
the outcomes of therapy. 
According to Eysenck and Rachman (1985) an abnormal behaviour develops along the 
following three stages: 
· In the first stage a series of traumatic events produce autonomic reactions in an 
individual (considered as unconditional responses) which in turn may result in neurotic 
behaviour patterns. 
· In the second stage, based on the classical conditioning principles, anxiety seems to 
get generalized to unhealthy proportions. 
· In the final stage, instrumental avoidance of painful or anxiety -provoking situations 
takes place by the individual. 
 
47 
 
The therapeutic process 
the primary goal of behaviour therapy is to acquire new behaviours, eliminate maladaptive 
behaviours, and strengthen and maintain desirable behaviours. The specific and observable 
goals for the client are decided during the history taking. Blackhain and Siberman (1971) 
suggest the following four specific steps that counselor and client should take in the process 
of defining goals: 
· Define the problem:  It involves defining a problem in specific, concrete and 
observable terms. Thus, a client is asked to specify when, where, how, and with whom the 
problem arises.  
· Take the developmental history:  It in the counsellor tries to find out how the 
problem had originated and how the client has handled past circumstances. 
· Establish specific goals:  Here behavioural counsellors help clients to break down 
goals into small, achievable units and also help them to develop needed skills by setting up 
learning experiences for clients (Krumboltz & Thoresen, 1976).  
· Determine the best methods for change:  Of the various behavioural methods 
available, the counsellor picks up the best possible method to achieve desired goals. If one 
method does not work, then it may be modified or a new one may be tried. Continuous 
assessment of the effectiveness of methods is also critical. 
According to Krumboltz and Thoresen, while formulating an acceptable goal in behavioral 
counselling the counsellor should keep the following things in mind: 
 · Goals are chosen are as desired by the client. 
 · Willingness of counsellor to help the client achieve these goals. 
 · Assessment of counsellor of  the extent to which the client achieves the goals. 
Role of the counsellor 
In behaviour therapy the counselor adopts an active directive role, where the client learns, 
unlearns, or relearns specific ways of behaving. In the process, the counsellor functions as a 
‘consultant, teacher, adviser, reinforcer, and facilitator’ (Gilliland, James & Bowman, 1989). 
He or she may  instruct, supervise or may support people in the client’s environment who are 
assisting in the change process. An effective behavioural counsellor operates from a broad 
perspective and involves the client in every phase of the counselling. Some social learning -
oriented counsellors serve as models for emulation, whereas others who are more respondent 
or operant focused are more directive end prescriptive in offering assistance. 
Counsellors using a behavioural approach differ widely regarding the use of psychological 
tests and diagnoses. Most employ some form of assessment device with their clients, to 
measures behaviour and actions. 
According to Goodstein (1972) the role of the counsellor is to facilitate the development of 
socially appropriate behaviour by systematically reinforcing the client’s behaviour. The 
attention and approval (or disinterest or disapproval) of the therapist serves as powerful 
reinforcers of client behaviour. 
48 
 
The client’s experience in therapy 
Behaviour therapy provides the therapist with a system of well-defined procedures to employ. 
It emphasizes the importance of client awareness and participation in the therapeutic process. 
The clients are actively involved in the selection and determination of goals. They must 
possess the motivation to change, and must be willing to cooperate in carrying out therapeutic 
activities, both during the therapeutic sessions and outside therapy in real -life situations. The 
success of therapy depends on how actively  the client participates in the therapeutic process.  
In behaviour therapy the client is encouraged to experiment with new behaviours for the 
purpose of enlarging their repertoire of adaptive behaviour. They are also helped to generalize 
and transfer the learning acquired within the therapeutic situation to situations outside 
therapy. The therapeutic relationship between the client and the therapist must be warm, 
empathetic, authentic, permissive, and acceptable. Behaviour therapists regard these 
conditions as necessary, but not sufficient, for behaviour change to occur within the 
therapeutic process.  
Techniques 
Some of the best researched and most effective behavioural counselling techniques available 
are—token economy, behavioural contract, extinction, reinforcement, punishment, aversive 
therapy, systematic desensitization, modelling etc.Aanother technique that is used frequently 
in behavioural counselling is self-regulation behaviour programme. Neilans and Israel (1981) 
suggested a four component model for a self -regulation behavioural change program as 
follows: 
1. Self-monitoring: involves observing one’s own behaviour and charting or recording in 
an organized way relevant behaviour. 
2. Self-goal setting: involves setting of a specific goal or goals, thereby establishing 
criteria for subsequent performance evaluation. 
3. Self-evaluation: involves making a comparison between the individual’s performance 
(as monitored and recorded) and the performance criterion (the goal).  
4. Self-reinforcement: refers to withholding of necessary, appropriate rewards after 
evaluating one’s performance with respect to the goal. 
Evaluation of behavioural counselling 
Ironically, what has often been cited as the greatest fault of behavioural therapy proves to be 
its greatest advantage in the counselling setting; namely that, it deals directly with the 
symptoms. Some of its major contributions are given below: 
· An important contribution of the behaviour therapy approach is the systematic way 
that its therapeutic methods and techniques have been subjected to experimental 
verification. Thus the procedures are in a continual process of refinement and 
development. 
· The approach is quite specific in nature and is helps to keep clearly in focus the 
client’s goals. 
49 
 
· It stresses the therapist’s and the client’s mutual progress in reaching those goals. 
Some of the major criticisms of behavioural counselling are as follows: 
· Behavioural counselling is criticized for not treating causes but superficially dealing 
with symptoms. As when the underlying causes are not dealt with and only superficial 
symptoms are treated then there are high changes that if one group of symptoms is 
removed, another group of symptoms will take its place. 
· Another major criticism of behavioural counselling is that it focuses almost 
exclusively on treating well -defined, overt symptoms such as phobias, tension states, 
speech disorders in addition to drugs or alcohol abuse, and sexual problems etc. 
· Broader problems of personal and social adjustment, which practitioners most often 
encounter in psychotherapy are not dealt with in this modality. 
· Behavioural counselling may change behaviour, but it does not change feelings. Some 
critics agree that feelings must change before behaviour can change. 
However, this approach has made significant contributions to both clinical and educational 
settings too. Behavioural counselling approaches are especially popular in institutional 
settings, such as mental hospital or sheltered workshops. They are the approaches of choice in 
working with clients who have such specific problems as eating disorders, substance abuse 
and sexual dysfunction. Behavioural approaches are also useful in addressing anxiety, stress, 
assertiveness, parenting and social interaction (Seligman, 1986; Thoresen and Coates, 1980). 
Ranchman (1967) described studies that demonstrate that behaviour therapy does work in 
successfully treating and wide range of neurotic conditions, including phobias, hysteria, 
sexual disorders, tics, tension states, and children’s disorders. 
Carkhuff and Berenson (1967) assert that the clinical and research evidence suggest that 
behaviour modification techniques are well suited for use in experimental setting; efforts in 
human engineering and situations where there is an acute shortage of time. 
1.6.5 Cognitive Theories 
Cognitive theories of counselling focus on thinking. They believe that thoughts influence 
feelings and behaviours. If a person changes a way of thinking, feelings and behaviours will 
get modified automatically. These theories are successful in working with clients who: 
 · Are average to above-average in intelligence 
 · Have moderate to high levels of functional distress 
 · Are able to identify thoughts and feelings 
 · Are not psychotic or disabled by present problems 
 · Are willing and able to complete systematic homework assignments 
 · Possess a repertoire of behaviour skills and responses 
· Who process information on a visual and auditory level (Cormier & Hackney, 
1987). 
50 
 
Cognitive approaches are also frequently used in working with clients who have inhibited 
functioning, such as depression. 
Aaron Beck's Cognitive Theory 
Beck’s cognitive theory considers the subjective symptoms such as a negative view of self, 
world, and future defining features of depression. The model assumes that 
psychopathological states represent extreme or excessive forms of normal cognitive, 
emotional, and behavioral functioning. Additionally, the cognitive theory posits that anxiety 
and depression can be distinguished by their cognitive content, with thoughts of personal loss 
and failure specific to depression and cognitive content involving physical or psychological 
threat and danger specific to anxiety. Although initially conceptualized as a model relevant to 
anxiety and depression, the cognitive model is now applied to a wide range of disorders such 
as eating disorders. 
A central tenet of the cognitive theory is that our thinking influences our emotional and 
behavioral experiences and vice versa. When applied in therapy, there is an emphasis on 
working toward changing one’s thoughts as a means to altering feelings and behaviors.  
Cognitive theory has focused on thought processes that become habitual and automatic. 
These automatic thoughts are theorized to differ depending on the specific psychological 
problems a person is experiencing. How these thoughts become automatic is a matter of 
scientific study. Beck originally posited that individuals derive meaning from their 
experiences and, with time, rely on what he called cognitive schemas (i.e., hypothetical 
organizing structures of experience represented in thoughts) to provide meaning to 
experience. For example, someone with a history of limited close relationships may, over 
time, develop a schema like ‘I am unlovable.’ Schemas can constitute particular 
vulnerabilities to interpret certain types of experiences inaccurately. For instance, if a person 
believes they are unlovable, then they may interpret a colleague not inviting them to a party 
as further evidence of their unlovable personality rather than considering that the party was 
only for that person’s family members or that they were actually invited but did not see the 
invitation. 
Beck also developed the notion of the cognitive triad to describe how depressed adults tend to 
think about the world. The triad refers to thoughts about self, world, and future. In all the 
three instances, depressed individuals tend to have negative views. Thus, a depressed 
individual would tend to think they are a worthless person living in a futile and unforgiving 
world with a hopeless future. Beck’s work also led to the identification of particular patterns 
of habitual and maladaptive thinking that he called errors of thought. These included the 
following: 
· Arbitrary Inference:  It is referred to an individual quickly and on the basis of 
limited evidence, draws a conclusion. Example: That person did not smile at me. He hates 
me. 
· Selective Abstraction: It occurred when an individual focuses only on some of the 
available evidence to draw a conclusion. Example: My boss mentioned that my report needed 
some edits. He hated it. 
51 
 
· Overgeneralization: It is referred to an individual takes one negative event and 
assumes that it has meaning that pervades his/her whole like. Example: I missed that shot. I 
am never going to succeed in anything. 
Rational Emotive Behavioural Counselling  
Among the best-known cognitive theories are Aaron Beck’s Cognitive Therapy, Albert Ellis’s 
Rational Emotive Therapy, and Eric Berne’s Transactional Analysis. RET assumes that 
people are both inherently rational and irrational, sensible and crazy (Weinrach,1980). 
According to Ellis (1979), people are active thinking beings and are capable of engaging in 
both rational and irrational thinking 
Thus RET is based on the assumption that human beings are born with a potential for both 
rational thinking and irrational thinking and verbalizing, loving, communication with others, 
and growth and self-actualization. They also have propensities for self-destruction, avoidance 
of thought, procrastination, endless repetition of mistakes, superstition, intolerance, 
perfectionism and self-blame, and avoidance of actualization of growth potentials. They have 
the tendencies within —both to stick with old, dysfunctional behaviour patterns and to 
discover a variety of ways to engage in self-sabotage. 
It further asserts that people have vast untapped resources for actualizing their potentials and 
that they can change their personal and social destinies by altering their thought patterns. 
According to it, people are born with the tendency to insist that all wants, demands, wishes, 
and needs be met in life; if they do not immediately get what they want, they condemn both 
themselves and others (Ellis, 1973). 
RET stresses that humans think, emote, and behave simultaneously. Rarely do they emote 
without thinking and feelings are usually excited by the perception of a specific situation. It is 
imperative to understand how a person emotes, thinks, perceives, and acts, in order to 
understand self-defeating behaviour. 
According to Ellis, people have within themselves the means to control their thoughts, 
feelings, and actions, but they must first realize what they are telling themselves (i.e., their 
‘self-talk’) in order to gain command of their lives (Ellis, 1962). This is a matter of personal, 
conscious awareness. 
RET is based on the assumption that psychopathology is originally learned and aggravated by 
the inculcation of irrational beliefs from significant others during childhood. The negative 
and irrational believes get further re -instilled by the processes of autosuggestion and self -
repetition. In this manner the dysfunctional attitudes remain alive and operative within us. 
RET sees emotions as the products of human thinking. For instance, when we think 
something is bad, then we feel bad about that thing.  Thus, Ellis (1967) maintained that 
emotional disturbance therefore, essentially consists of mistaken, illogical, invalid table 
sentences or meanings which the disturbed individual dogmatically and un -challengingly 
believes, and upon which he therefore emotes or acts to his own defeat. 
RET insists that at the core of most emotional disturbances lies blame. Hence in order to 
overcome an illness, one first needs to stop blaming ourselves and others and instead should 
learn to accept ourselves in spite of our imperfections. Anxiety stems from internal repetition 
of the sentence “I don’t like my behaviour and would like to change” and the self -blaming 
52 
 
sentence “because of my wrong behaviour and my mistakes, I am a rotten person and I am to 
blame, and I deserve to suffer”.  According to RET, this anxiety is unnecessary. A person can 
be helped to see that these precise, irrational sentences are false and does not help in anyway. 
In RET the therapists teaches clients how to feel unhurt even when they are unaccepted and 
unloved by significant others. Ellis (1962) gave the following eleven common irrational 
beliefs that people often carry: 
1. It is absolutely essential to be loved or approved of by every significant person 
in one’s life. 
2. To be worthwhile, a person must be competent, adequate, and achieving in 
everything attempted. 
3. Some people are wicked, bad and villainous and therefore should be blamed or 
punished. 
 4. It is terrible and catastrophic whenever events do not occur as one hopes. 
5. Unhappiness is the result of outside events, and therefore a person has no 
control over such despair. 
6. Something potentially dangerous or harmful should be cause for great concern 
and should always be kept in mind. 
 7. Running away from difficulties and responsibilities is easier than facing them. 
8. A person must depend on others and must have someone stronger on whom to 
rely. 
 9. The past determines one’s present behavior and thus it cannot change. 
 10. A person should get upset over the problems and difficulties of others. 
11. There is always a right answer to every problem, and a failure to find this 
answer is catastrophic. 
The A-B-C theory of personality is central to RET theory and practice. A is the existence of a 
fact, an event, or the behaviour or attitude of an individual. C is the emotional consequences 
or reaction of the individual; the reaction can be either appropriate or inappropriate. A (the 
activating events) does not cause C (the emotional consequence). Instead, B, which is the 
person’s belief about A, causes C, i.e., the emotional reactions. For example, if a person 
experiences depression after a divorce, it may not be the divorce itself that causes the 
depressive reaction but the person’s beliefs about being a failure, being rejected, or losing a 
mate which cause depression. Thus human beings are largely responsible for creating their 
own emotional reactions and disturbances. 
Disturbed emotional reactions such as depression and anxiety are initiated and perpetuated by 
the self-defeating belief system, which is based on irrational ideas that one has incorporated. 
These emotional disturbances can be eliminated or modified by directly working with the 
individual’s belief systems and teaching them how to actively and vigorously dispute (D) 
their irrational beliefs.” This disputation can takes place by the use of a highly active -
directive, didactic, philosophic, homework-assigning therapist. 
53 
 
RET assumes that, since people’s irrational beliefs and values are causally linked to their 
emotional and behavioural disturbances, the most efficient way of helping them to make 
basic personality changes is to confront them directly with their philosophies of life, to 
explain to them how their ideas make them disturbed, to attack their irrational ideas on 
logical grounds, and to teach them how to think logically, thereby enabling them to change or 
eliminate their irrational ideas. RET thus confronts clients with their irrational beliefs and 
attacks, challenges, questions, and disputes those beliefs. 
After the A-B-C comes D, disputing. Essentially, D is the application of the scientific method 
to help clients challenge their irrational beliefs that lead to disturbances in their emotions and 
behaviour.    
The goals of RET focus on helping people realize that they can live more rational and 
productive lives by critically examining their most basic values. RET asks clients to avoid 
making ‘should’, ‘must’ and ‘ought’ statements. It further helps client to see irrational 
thinking develops and how silly the consequences of such thinking are. 
Another goal of RET is to assist people in changing their self -defeating habits of thought or 
behaviour. One way this is accomplished is through teaching clients the above mentioned A -
B-C theory of personality. It also makes use of a number of homework assignments, such as 
‘shame attack exercises’ which enables the clients come to a realization that the world does 
not stop if a mistake is made or if a want remains unfulfilled. A client also learns that others 
are ‘fallible human beings’ and need not be perfect. Finally a client learns that goals may be 
achieved without catastrophizing personal situations. 
In the RET approach counsellors play an active and direct role. They are instructors, teaching, 
and correcting the client’s cognitions. They encourage clients to engage in activities that 
bring forward their irrational beliefs and help them to eventually dispute them and replace 
them with more rational beliefs. According to Ellis (1980), an RET counsellor needs to be 
bright, knowledgeable, empathetic, persistent, scientific, interested in helping others and 
themselves users of RET. 
The main assessment conducted by RET counsellors is the evaluation of a client’s thinking. 
Some formal tests are used to measure rational/irrational thinking, but the evaluations process 
is primarily accomplished in counselor/client sessions. As a rule, RET practitioners do not 
rely heavily on the diagnostic categories. 
To quite a large extent, the client’s role in RET is like that of a student, learner where the 
client learns how to apply logical thoughts to problem solving. The client’s acquisition of 
emotional insight into the sources of their disturbances is a crucial part of the therapeutic 
process. 
According to Ellis (1973), a good rapport between the client and the therapist is most 
important followed by personal warmth and affection and a personal relationship between 
therapist and client. 
RET contends that people can experience personality change through many diverse avenues 
such as having significant life experiences; learning vicariously by reading about other’s 
experiences; entering into a relationship with a therapist; viewing movies; listening to tape 
54 
 
recordings; practicing specific homework assignments; spending time alone for thinking and 
meditating; and in many other ways deciding to make lasting personality change. 
RET makes use of a number of diverse techniques, two primary ones being teaching and 
disputing. Disputing thoughts and beliefs takes one of three forms: cognitive, imaginal, and 
behavioural. The process is more effective when all three forms are used (Walen, DiGiuseppe 
and Wessler, 1980). Cognitive disputation involves the use of direct questions, logical 
reasoning, and persuasion. Direct questions may challenge the client to prove that his or her 
response is logical. Sometimes these inquiries involve the use of the word why, which is 
seldom used in counseling because it makes most people defensive and closes the doors for 
exploration. Examples of questions in cognitive disputation include ‘why must you?, and  
‘why must that be?’ During these inquiries, clients learn to distinguish between rational and 
irrational thoughts. They also learn the superiority of rational thoughts. 
Another form of cognitive disputation involves the use of syllogisms, which help clients and 
counsellors to understand more thoroughly inductive as well as deductive fallacies that 
underlie emotions.  
Imaginal disputation depends on the client’s ability to imagine and employs a technique 
known as Rational Emotive Imagery (REI) (Maultsby, 1984). REI may be used in one of two 
ways. First, the client may be asked to imagine a situation where he or she is likely to become 
upset. The client examines his or her self -talk during that imagined situation. Then the 
counsellor asks the client to imagine the same situation again but this time with a more 
moderate and rational self -talk. Second, the counsellor asks a client to imagine a situation in 
which the client feels or behaves differently from some real instance. The client is then 
instructed to examine the self-talk used in this imagined situation. 
The Emotional Control Card (ECC) is a device that helps clients reinforce and expand the 
practice of REI (Sklare, Taylor & Hyland, 1985). Four emotionally debilitating categories 
(anger, self-criticism, anxiety, and depression) are listed on wallet -sized ECCs (Ellis, 1986). 
Under each category, a list of inappropriate or self -destructive feelings and a parallel list of 
appropriate or non -defeating feelings are written. The client is advised to make use of these 
cards and rectify their quality of feelings, when faced with troublesome situations. 
Behavioural disputation involves behaving in ways that are opposite of the client’s usual 
ways. This is achieved by the use of role plays and completion of homework assignments 
given between sessions. 
Two other powerful techniques are confrontation and encouragement. In it, sometimes, the 
RET counsellor empathetically challenges the client who claims to be thinking rationally but 
in reality is not doing so. 
One interesting variation on RET is Rational Behaviour Therapy (RBT), which was 
formulated by Maxie Maultsby (1971). RBT emphasizes cognitive change in a way more 
behavioural than originally conceptualized by Ellis. It involves checking the activating events 
and disputing one’s self talk by using questions, such as “is my thinking here based on 
obvious fact?” 
In RBT, clients regularly complete homework assignments in rational self -analysis (RSA), in 
which they write down significant events in their lives and their thoughts and feelings 
55 
 
associated with those events. The beliefs of the persons are then evaluated for their degree of 
rationality and changed in accordance with the rules of rational behaviour. 
According to Ellis (1973), RET is likely to be more effective with clients who are willing to 
engage in hard work; in practicing the homework assignments and are not seriously disturbed 
or have a single major symptom. Hence, it is a choice of treatment for moderate anxiety; 
marital problems; sexual difficulties; neurotic personality disorder; juvenile delinquents and 
adult criminals; borderline psychotics, psychotics who have some contact with reality, and 
clients with psychosomatic problems. 
RET has a number of strengths, as mentioned below: 
 · The approach is clear, easily learned, and effective.  
 · It is appropriate for the treatment of affective disorders, anxiety disorders, and 
adjustment disorders. Ellis (1977) provides research data on the effectiveness of RET with 
different types of clients in specific settings. 
· The approach can easily be combined with behavioural techniques to help 
clients experience more fully what they are learning.  
 · The approach is relatively short-term, usually lasting from ten to fifty sessions.  
 · Clients may continue to use the approach in their lives on a self-help basis.  
 · The economical and efficiency aspects of RET are impressive. 
· The approach has generated an impressive amount of literature and research 
for clients and counselors. 
· The approach has continued to evolve over the years as techniques have been 
refined. 
The approach also has certain limitations as follows: 
· The approach cannot be used effectively with individuals such as 
schizophrenics, who have severe thought disorders, and it is not productive 
with people who are severely mentally impaired.  
· The approach is limited if its practitioners do not combine its early cognitive 
base with more behavioural and emotive techniques.  
· According to Bernard (1981), RET is too dogmatic, especially in its 
assessment of a client’s problem and is the interpretation of the client’s private 
thoughts. 
· Since, the therapist has a large degree of power by virtue of persuasion and 
directiveness, psychological harm is more possible in RET than in the less 
directive client -centered approaches. Therefore, the therapist’s level of 
training, knowledge and skill, perceptiveness and accuracy of judgment is 
particularly important in RET.    
 
56 
 
Applications 
RET, as applied to one -to-one work, is generally designed for relatively brief therapy and 
teaches clients many of the basics of how to attack the underlying sources of their problems. 
RET is also suitable for group therapy. In the group setting members also have an opportunity 
to experience assertive training, role -playing, and a variety of risk -taking activities. They can 
learn social skills and practice interacting with others in after -group sessions. RET has also 
been intensively adopted in the clinical, school, social work, industrial, family and health 
settings. 
 
Check Your Progress 
 9. Name a few disorders which may be treated effectively with psychoanalysis.  
 10. Name some techniques used in existential counselling.  
 11. Name some common negative script patterns. 
 12. Which are the two primary techniques of Rational Emotive Therapy (RET)?  
 
1.7 Helping Relationship and Helping Process 
Helping is a bond created between two or more individuals with the intention of providing 
and receiving assistance. Helpers must be able to comprehend emotions and experiences by 
putting themselves in the client’s shoes. It is a partnership in which at least one party seeks to 
further the other’s development, maturation, or enhanced functioning. The therapy 
relationship should ideally have a distinct beginning and end. It moves through the 
commitment, process, change, and termination phases. However, we take ‘helping’ for 
granted. It is a well-known word in our language. Social workers, youth workers, and support 
personnel are a few examples of professions that have historically been referred to as ‘helping 
professions’. ‘Do you need some help?’ is a common question we ask as a society as whole. 
The definition of helping isn’t always clear. There are some features we should consider 
when defining ‘helping partnerships’.  
1.7.1 Definition of Helping 
The idea of assisting is closely associated with the social professions, such as social work, 
youth work, and community work (Banks, 2004). People involved in informal education and 
social pedagogy in general can certainly say the same. People who are dealing with 
challenging decisions and circumstances, anxious thoughts, and/or a sense of missed 
opportunities may likely feel they need someone to listen to them, give them support, and 
help them understand what is happening so they can go on.  
Other individuals may occasionally decide that giving people this ‘assistance’ is in their best 
interests. In his 1975 book, The Skilled Helper , Gerard Egan made a strong case for the 
importance of helping in the counselling field and claimed that it involves two fundamental 
objectives. Each of these options is based on what the person who needs aid needs. The 
primary concern are the ones who need assistance in problem -solving. The goal is to ‘help 
57 
 
clients manage their problems in living more effectively and develop unused or underused 
opportunities more fully’. The second objective focuses on their general capacity for 
problem-solving and creating opportunities for them. This goal is to make clients ‘become 
better at helping themselves in their everyday lives’ (Egan, 1998). 
In addition to being part of counselling and advice, helping is frequently used to refer to 
specific teaching moments, such as ‘helping’ someone with their schoolwork or filling out an 
income tax form. It also refers to providing practical aid, such as clothing or money, or direct 
physical support, such as assisting someone in bathing or using the restroom. The helping is 
characterised and driven by discourse, which occurs in a wide range of contexts (many not 
created by the helper), and occurs in many different places. However, we feel that 
characterising the job solely in terms of counselling or teaching oversimplifies it. It requires 
referencing to a variety of ways of thinking and behaving to make sense of what these people 
are actually doing and expressing. To provide direct aid and be perceived as people of 
integrity, it is necessary to listen and discuss issues and problems with others. It is also 
necessary to teach and offer counsel.  
Helpers focus on education, relationships, and working with others to put their knowledge 
into practise. But it also overlaps with the counselling field. They achieve this not by 
adopting the role of counsellor but rather by having a specific type of skills (British 
Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy, 2002 and Higson, 2004). Counselling is 
founded on a particular set of traditions of thinking and practices and involves a more 
formalised relationship than what is being talked here. Because of this, the relationship in 
therapy and counselling differs from the helping relationship that are formed generally. 
Helpers must therefore be aware of who they are and be genuine. If as helpers, they don’t 
know who they are, they won’t be able to understand the issues of other people. 
Smith and Smith (2008) contend that in addition to self -awareness, helpers also require a few 
other characteristics. People are pulled into relationships with individuals who are perceived 
as being compassionate, dedicated, and wise when they are looking for someone to assist 
them, reflect on, and improve their lives. They are likely to look around for assistance from 
persons they may readily and confidently approach. They seek people they already know for 
supportive relationships.  
For a helping relationship to be effective, a helper must possess the following skills: 
· Compassion: Being in tune with oneself and other people (in fact, the entire world) is 
what compassion is. It embodies goodness at its most innate level. It is a balance that allows 
love to flow outward without expecting anything in return. People aren’t used as tools and 
exploited in it. It views people as perfect, just the way they are (Brandon, 1990). The way 
many people talk about professionalism makes it difficult to deal with concepts like these, yet 
there is a lot of data that shows people are better equipped to examine concerns and issues 
when they are with a helper who welcomes and respects them, listens, and cares. 
· Caring: It is helpful to first make the distinction between ‘caring about’ and ‘caring 
for’, as Nel Noddings suggests. According to Noddings, showing someone you care for them 
entails feeling pity for them. It also requires being receptive to what the other person is 
saying as well as what they may be feeling and considering. But there is also another aspect 
to this. We must consider the interests of the person we are caring for while making 
58 
 
decisions. Caregivers must react to those that they are responsible for in ways that are, 
ideally, beneficial. One more step is required before this can be referred to be ‘caring’. The 
person being cared for must also have some awareness that an act of care has been 
performed. Caring entails a connection, a relationship, and some degree of reciprocity 
between the caregiver and the one being cared for. Both parties benefit from the relationship 
in various ways. Being cared about is more ethereal. When we talk about caring for someone, 
we typically mean something more subtle than providing them with immediate assistance. 
For instance, we might be concerned about the suffering of people in developing nations. 
This may lead us to do something about it – but the result is rarely cared for.  
· Wisdom: Nel Noddings contends that it is through our families and personal 
connections that we first learn what it is to be cared for. Then, gradually, we learn to care for 
ourselves and, consequently, to care for others (Noddings, 2002). Noddings contends that this 
concern is unquestionably the basis of our feeling of fairness. Helpers, according to Smith 
and Smith (2008), should develop wisdom in both themselves and the people they support. It 
is this quality that draws people to them in particular for assistance. The issue with wisdom is 
that it is typically attributed to specific people by others rather than being asserted by them. It 
typically indicates that the individual so described is seen as possessing a keen understanding, 
a respect for the truth, and the capacity to make wise decisions. According to Smith and 
Smith, this requires helpers to have an understanding of the kinds of things that might 
contribute to happiness and human wellbeing. They also need to be knowledgeable, 
particularly about themselves and their relationships, about ‘what makes people tick’, and 
about the systems of which we are a part. 
1.7.2 Stages of Helping 
Stage theory is frequently used in works that examine counselling and/or assisting 
techniques. When considering counselling or more formal relationships, this is possible 
because they typically entail some kind of written contract or agreement to work together. 
This normally includes information regarding the quantity, time, length, and frequency of 
sessions. Thus, it is rather simple to imagine the various levels or stages that a helping 
relationship might entail. For instance, Gerard Egan’s (2002) influential approach is 
organised around these three stages: 
Stage 1: What is happening? Assisting clients in identifying the main problems that require 
changing. 
Stage II: What options make sense to me in? Assisting clients in setting goals. 
Stage III: What must I do to obtain what I require or desire? Assisting clients in creating 
plans to achieve goals 
Since the 1975 publication of the first version of his book, he has made changes to these 
stages. He then went through the following stages: Establishing and exploring a supportive 
relationship; coming to new conclusions and providing fresh angles; and lastly, taking action 
by assisting the client in adopting those plans. The changes are intriguing since they take into 
account model feedback, research into the assisting process, and years of running training 
programmes. 
59 
 
A three stage concept is also employed by many other authors. The helping or working 
relationship is viewed as having a beginning, middle, and end when it is put into its most 
basic (and likely most beneficial) form (see, for example, Culley and Bond 2004). A 
comparable framework is presented by Alistair Ross in 2003: beginning, developing, and 
letting go. Stage models, however, are less useful to many social pedagogues and informal 
instructors. The type of connection typically involved in informal and community education, 
as well as activities like pastoral care, does not typically entail an explicit contract, and the 
amount of time, duration, and frequency of encounters (rather than meetings) varies greatly. 
For instance, endings might be really abrupt. Having said that, by emphasising beginnings, 
middles, and ends, such models do assist us in considering what may be involved at various 
points in relationships and in creating suitable responses (Smith, 2008). 
1.7.3 Helping as a Skill 
In a lot of the literature on helping and helping relationships, ‘helping skills’ are explored. So 
far, we’ve approached helping as a process and an orientation. It has been asserted that the 
relationship between the helper and the helped and who they are as persons determines 
whether the help is helpful or not. While important, skills are not the primary concern in this 
setting. There is a risk of becoming overly skill -focused. It is simple to lose sight of who we 
are, what our function is, and how we relate to this person as we fall into the pattern of 
practising a specific talent. As an example, consider listening. If we focus too much on 
listening as a skill, we may find ourselves spending more time seeming to listen (through 
posture, expression, and head nodding) than truly doing so.  
If we pay attention to what is being said as well as what is not being said, we will be able to 
convey this to the other person through the questions we pose, the remarks we make, and the 
relationships we establish (Smith, 2007). Having said that, there are some apparent areas of 
skill that we can draw upon, and these have to do with the way in which we encourage 
dialogue and exploration. As an example, we could consider what Sue Culley and Tim Bond 
(2004) refer to as ‘foundation skills’. They group these around three headings, which we have 
discussed in case of counselling as well: Attending and listening; Reflect ive skills; and 
Probing skills. 
Check Your Progress 
 13. What are the stages of helping according to Gerard Egan? 
 14. What are the foundation skills for a helper?  
 
1.8 Counsellor Goal-Setting Process 
Goals are important because it provides a sense of direction and purpose which are necessary 
for a meaningful evaluation of the usefulness of counselling. Patterson (1970) observes that 
the counsellor’s own values enter into counselling and psychotherapy in the choice or 
acceptance of a goal. Krumboltz (1966) believes that the client’s goals should be compatible 
with, though not necessarily identical to the values of their counsellors. Several psychologists 
believe that goals must be specific and mutually a rrived at for every client. Counsellor has 
60 
 
specific goals which are unique to each client and involve the consideration of the client’s 
expectation as well as the environmental aspects. 
Krumboltz (1966) has given three criteria’s for judging counselling goals: 
(i) The goal of counselling should be capable of being stated differently for each 
client. 
 (ii) They should be compatible with the values of the counselling. 
 (iii) The degree to which the goals are attained should be observable. 
George and Christiani have given five major goals of counselling regardless of the school of 
thought to which the counsellor belongs to: 
 (i) Facilitating behaviour change. 
 (ii) Improving client’s ability to establish and maintain relationship. 
 (iii) Enhancing the client’s effectiveness and ability to cope. 
 (iv) Promoting decisions making process. 
 (v) Facilitating client’s potential and development 
Narayan Rao (1989) talks about three types of goals: 
(i) Immediate goals:  Refer to the problem for which the client is seeking 
solution, here and now. 
(ii) Mediate goals and process goals:  They shape the counselee and counsellor 
inter relations and behaviour. They comprise facilitating procedure for 
enhancing the effectiveness of counselling. They include empathic 
understanding, warmth, friendliness which provide for inter -personal 
exploration , which , in turn , helps the client in his/her self -exploration and 
self-understanding and eventually leads to the long range goals. 
(iii) Ultimate long range goals:  Reflect the counsellor’s philosophy of life. It 
includes self -actualization, self -realization, self -enhancement and self -
transcendence to make the client autonomous. 
Parcoff (1961) distinguishes between immediate and ultimate goals. 
According to him, the former refers to the steps and stages in counselling 
process which lead to the realization of the ultimate goal.  
Patterson (1970) gave a model for describing immediate, mediate and ultimate 
goals. These goals are as follows: 
· Immediate goals:  Intrapersonal exploration, self -disclosure, self -exploration 
and self-awareness. 
· Mediate goals: Development of individual potentials, self -understanding, 
education, employment and satisfaction in work. 
61 
 
· Ultimate goals: Self-actualization, self-realization, self-enhancement, high on 
functionality, acceptance of self and others, empathy, deep interpersonal 
relationships, openness to experience, creativity, honesty, responsibility, 
genuineness, responsible, independence and consistency between self and self-
ideal. 
With respect to behavioural change, Krumboltz (1966) postulated three action –oriented 
goals— altering maladaptive behaviour , learning the decision making process, and 
preventing problems. There are then, three basic goals of counselling— self-exploration, self-
understanding, and behavioural change. There is no set time schedule for the 
accomplishments of each, but counsellor behaviour at each stage is designed to facilitate goal 
attainment. 
Nelson and Jones (1982) have given a number of different dimensions against which the 
goals of counselling may be viewed. Goals of counselling also differ with respect to the 
theoretical orientation or approach followed by the counsellor. These goals are given below: 
· Person-centered approach: When the counsellor adopts the person -centred 
approach, then the goals of counselling are realistic perception, openness to 
experience, trust of organismic valuing process, rationality, responsibility, self-regard, 
acceptance of others, and capacity for good personal relations, creativity and ethical 
living. 
· Reality approach: When the counsellor adopts this approach, then the goals 
of counselling are attainment of successful identity, acceptance of reality, acceptance 
of responsibility of one’s own behaviour, capacity to formulate and implement plans, 
involvement with others, and engagement in worthwhile activity and ethical 
behaviour. 
· Rational-emotive approach:  When the counsellor adopts the rational -
emotive approach, then the goals of counselling are rationality, appropriate 
emotionality, maximization of pleasure, minimization of anxiety, minimization of 
hostility, enlightened self-interest, self-direction, tolerance, acceptance of uncertainty, 
flexibility, commitment, risk-taking, self-acceptance. 
· Transactional analysis approach:  When the counsellor adopts the 
transactional analysis approach, then the goals of counselling are autonomous 
behaviour, awareness, spontaneity, intimacy, integrated adult attractiveness and 
responsiveness, objective data processing, personal responsibility, ‘I’m Ok -you are 
Ok’ life position and absence of games. 
· Freudian psychoanalytical approach:  When the counsellor adopts the 
psychoanalytical approach, then the goals of counselling are absence of neurotic 
symptoms, absence of debilitating repressions, ego strength, and ability to meet 
instinctual needs, capacity to love, capacity to work and adherence to realistic moral 
standards. 
· Behavioural approach: When the counsellor adopts the behavioural 
approach, then the goals of counselling are absence of deficits in behaviour, absence 
of weakness in behaviour, absence of mal -adaptive behaviour, absence of debilitating 
62 
 
anxiety reactions, capacity to relax, assertive behaviour, adequate sexual functioning, 
self-control and adequacy as behavioural model. 
· Occupational approach:  When the counsellor adopts the occupational 
approach, then the goals of counselling are optimum matching of person and work, 
formulation of realistic vocational self -concept, adequate exploration of career 
preferences, decision -making skills, absence of maladaptive anxiety reactions, 
capacity to plan, vocational satisfaction and stability, effective performance, 
transcendence of adverse socialization, optimization of opportunity structures and 
healthy leisure behaviour. 
Nelson and Jones (1982) have categorized goals of counselling on seven major dimensions:  
· Medical psychological: Goals may be based on a medical or sickness model 
involving the treatment, and if possible, the cure of mental diseases. Such medical 
classification scheme focuses on mental disorder frequently of an organic nature like 
schizophrenia, paranoid states, neurosis etc. The goals for counselling are in 
psychological rather than medical term. Especially with move severely disturbed 
clients, there may be overlap between the medical and the psychological goals. 
· Ultimate or mediating (Parloff 1961):  Ultimate goal of all therapy is to 
reduce discomfort and increase the effectiveness of the client or patient in his 
biological, personal and social functioning and make him autonomous. These goals 
are same irrespective of the school of thought to which a counsellor belongs to. 
Mediating goals involve the counselling psychologist or clinician’s assumptions about 
the steps to be taken in achieving the ultimate goal and here the goals appear to differ 
from one theory of counselling to another. Thus, the major difference between the 
theoretical positions may revolve around means rather than ends. 
· Internal or external:  Internal goals are those that clients state as their own 
and are frequently stated by them as problems, whereas, external goals are those 
stated for the clients by other people, e.g: parents, spouses or counsellor. Sometimes 
the differences between internal and external goals are difference in the language in 
which they are stated rather then real differences. 
· Intrinsic or derived:  According to Rogerian view, the goals of counselling 
are largely intrinsic to the organism that is to provide the emotional climate with core 
condition in which client’s can become more attuned to and act on their basic 
directional tendency towards self -actualization. Humanist’s believe that the goals of 
counselling should be to help the client to engage in a continuous process of 
autonomous self -realizing. However, behaviourists like skinner believe that 
counselling goals are largely determined by or derived from the environmental 
contingencies of reinforcement in their societies. 
· General or specific: Goals may be stated in broad terms, such as a high level 
of self-realizing (humanistic theorist) or in specific terms (behaviourists), such as the 
steps in a behavioural counselling approach using successive approximation to 
acquire a particular piece of behaviour systematically or to counter condition a 
specific phobic area. The issue of general and specific goals is related to theoretical 
assumptions about human nature and the ways in which people acquire, perpetuate 
63 
 
and can change their behaviour. Sometimes in practice, counsellors offer their clients 
a basic helping relationship focused on improving their general sense of worth and 
ability to cope with life, at the same time focusing on specific areas of behaviour or 
thinking when they and their clients deem it appropriate. 
· Goals as developmental tasks: Some writers like Super and Ginzberg believe 
that it is hard to consider counselling goals independent of the individual’s age and 
hence developmental status in his culture or sub -culture. Erikson’s eight ages of man 
and their developmental conflict is based on this assumption. These ages and conflicts 
are given below 
Age Conflict 
Oral sensory Basic trust vs Mistrust 
Muscular-Anal Autonomy vs Shame doubt 
Locomotor-Genital Initiative vs Guilt 
Latency Industry vs Inferiority 
Puberty and Adolescence Industry vs Role confusion 
Young adulthood Intimacy vs Isolation 
Adulthood Generativity vs Stagnation 
Maturity Ego integrity vs Despair 
 
               
Another developmental view point, which focuses on behavioural goals, is that of 
Havighurst. His six major age periods, with illustrative developmental tasks are: 
· Infancy and early childhood (birth to 6 years) — forming concepts and 
developing language. 
· Middle childhood (age 6 years to 12 years) —Learning an appropriate 
masculine or feminine social role 
· Adolescence (age 12 years to 15 years) —Achieving more mature relations 
with both sexes. 
 · Early adulthood (ages 18 years to 30 years)—Getting started in an occupation. 
 · Middle age (age 30 years to 60 years)— Existing teenage children. 
· Later maturity (age 60 years +) — Adjusting to decreasing physical strength 
and health. 
Topic area 
Another dimension against which the goals of counselling are frequently viewed is that of 
topic area. A common distinction is that between personal, educational, occupational 
counselling and their related goals. For instance, goals in the topic area of personal relations 
might include increasing socially assertive responses and learning to discriminate between 
insults and friendly teasing. These goals might than be further broker down into sub goals. 
Individual, institutional, and social 
Many counselling goals are stated in terms of individual and small group. However, a number 
of theorists such as Rogers, Freud, Skinner are concerned with large group and societal goals. 
64 
 
At the institutional and societal levels counselling goals may provide a basis for social and 
political change. 
According to Narayan Rao, some of the major goals of counselling generally accepted by 
counsellors are given below:  
· Achievement of the mental health:  The need of mental health is identified as an 
‘important goal of counselling by some individual who claim that when one reaches or attains 
positive mental health, one learns to adjust and responds more positively to people and 
situations’. Others believe that prevention of emotional tensions, anxieties, indecision and 
similar problems is also an important goal of counselling. They hold the view that 
counselling should lead to positive feelings of warmth and of being liked. Kell and Mueller 
(1962) hold that the promotion and development of feelings of being liked, sharing with, and 
receiving and giving interaction rewards from other human beings is the legitimate goals of 
counselling. 
· Resolution of problems: In behavioural terms, three categories of behavioural goals 
can be identified, namely, “altering maladaptive behaviour, learning the decision making 
process and preventing problems (Krumboltz, 1966).” Wolpe (1958) feels that the goal of 
counselling is to relieve the suffering and disability of the clients. 
· Improving personal effectiveness: There is a close relation between the preservation 
of good mental health and securing desirable behavioural changes. Blocher(1966) defines an 
effective person as “one who is able to commit himself to projects, investing time and energy 
and willing to take appropriate economic, psychological and physical risks. He is seen as 
having the competence to recognize, define and solve problems. He is seen reasonably 
consistent outside and within his typical role situation. He is seen as being able to think in 
different and original, that is, creative ways. Finally, he is able to control impulses and 
produce appropriate responses to frustration, hostility and ambiguity.” 
· Counselling to help change: According to Blocher (1966), there are two additional 
goals of counselling. One is that counselling should maximize individual freedom to choose 
and act within the conditions imposed by the environment. And the second goal is that, 
counselling should increase the effectiveness of the individual responses evolved by the 
environment. Tiedeman(1964) holds that the goal of counselling is to focus on the mechanism 
of change and that the counsellor should be helped in the process of becoming. Shoben(1965) 
also considers personal development as the goal of counselling. 
· Decision making as a goal of counselling:  It is through the process of making 
critical decisions that personal growth is fostered. Reaves and Reaves (1965) point out that 
the objective of counselling is to stimulate the individual to evaluate, make, accept and act 
upon his choice. Counselling enables the individual to make decision independently. In other 
words, the counsellor should know how and why the client made the concerned decisions. In 
the process of decision -making, information may be required and the counsellor should 
provide it or help obtain it. The information might have to be clarified, sorted out and 
analysed. The counsellor should help in such a manner that the client is able to make 
responsible decisions. Tyler (1961) also defines the goal of counselling as to help the 
counselee utilize the resources - intra personal and environmental –available and make 
decisions based on them to cope with life situations. 
65 
 
  Sometimes the clients have goals which are vague and their implications are 
not fully appreciated. In that case, it is the job of a counsellor to clarify the counsellor’s goal 
based on is background, professional training and rich experience. 
  Sometimes some goals may reflect the subjective expectations of the 
counsellors themselves. The different goals elucidated by the counsellor gives the counselee 
the choice of making free, informed and responsible decisions, being fully conscious of their 
own strengths, weaknesses, assets, and abilities. 
· Modification of the behaviour as a goal:  Stress the need for modification of 
behaviour is advocated by Behaviour oriented counsellors, for example, removal of 
undesirable behaviour or action or reduction of a maladaptive behaviour such that the 
individual attains satisfaction and effectiveness. Similarly, growth–oriented counsellors stress 
on the development of potentialities within the individual. Existentially -oriented counsellors 
stress self enhancement and self -fulfilment. One needs to remember that one cannot obtain 
self enhancement or self fulfilment without first removing undesirable behaviour. 
1.8.1 Limitations of Goals 
The various goals of counselling also have certain limitations as counselling goals frequently 
have to ‘tailor-made’ to meet the realities of clients and their situations. Also goals vary from 
client to client, from one counsellor’s theoretical orientation to the other, and also from one 
problem to the other. Thus limitations in goals are caused by the client, the counsellor or the 
contextual considerations. 
In short, the counsellor’s decisions about goals are often more complex than they appear at 
first. It is important for counsellors to think through their goals in respect of both their overall 
roles and how they behave with specific clients or groups of clients. While formulating goals 
the counsellor needs to become aware of some of their underlying or hidden assumptions as 
counsellors, like this client, have to resist tendencies to engage in self-protection.  
Check Your Progress 
 15. What are the criteria for judging counselling’s goals?  
 16. What are the ultimate long-range goals? 
 
1.9 Counselling in India 
Since the beginning of time, counselling in its broadest sense has existed in some form or 
another. In every society, the elders not only established the cultural norms of behaviour but 
also advised the younger generations to adhere to them. In India, parents and teachers in 
particular believed that one of their fundamental and sacred duties was to provide counselling 
in the form of advice and direction. The frequently recited proverb ‘ Mata, Pita, Guru, 
Devam’ (Mother, Father, Teacher, God) served as a reminder to the young people of both the 
counsellors and the importance of who should provide counselling at different periods of life. 
India’s ancient epics are rife with different forms of counselling. 
 Elders were more than willing to take on the role of counsellors, and children quickly 
complied when they sought counsel. Many of these situations may be brushed off as simple 
66 
 
instances of ‘giving advice’. However, it is not difficult to recognise the scientific 
methodology and moral principles of contemporary counselling procedures in the majority of 
those historic events. The conversation between Krishna and Arjuna on the battlefield of 
Kurukshetra is the most famous counselling scenario in the epics. Devoted researchers in this 
field may need to provide an answer as to whether this discourse exhibited all the traits of 
contemporary counselling. The applicability and relevance of contemporary counselling 
practices in various cultures are frequently questioned. 
 Naturally, the beginnings of psychology in India should be the starting point of the 
counselling movement in the country. The first Chair in psychology was endowed at the 
Mysore University in south India. A psychology department at the Calcutta University was 
established not more than a year prior to this, with a lecturer serving as the Head of the 
Department. Since that time, more than 20 years, psychology has made little progress at the 
other universities in India. Midway through the 1940s, Patna University established a 
psychology department, which was swiftly followed by similar establishments at Banaras 
Hindu University, Lucknow University, and other universities. 
 However, a large portion of the advancement shown in the creation of new 
departments occurred in the 1960s. Since then, the various departments have been focusing 
on experimental approach as they prepare students for postgraduate degrees in psychology. 
Alongside this development, applied psychology became established as a separate division 
inside the existing psychology departments. Both the department of psychological services at 
Patna University and the applied psychology branch of the Calcutta University were founded 
in 1938 and 1945, respectively. However, at universities where psychology was provided, 
counselling psychology or its predecessor, vocational counselling, did not rank as an essential 
service. 
 In order to offer counselling on a small scale, voluntary private organisations were 
first created in Calcutta and thereafter in Bombay. The David Hare Training College in 
Calcutta came to be identified with the guidance movement. In 1941, Batliboy and 
Mukherjee established the Batliboy V ocational Guidance Bureau in Bombay. Since they had 
previously worked in the Calcutta Bureau, they already had some experience. The Batliboy 
bureau operated for six years before ceasing to exist. However, at this time it provided the 
community with useful services. It successfully carried out a brief orientation course in 
teacher guidance for the first time. This was the precursor to all subsequent career masters 
training programmes offered in various locations throughout India (Khorshed, 1963).  
 The Acharya Narendra Dev committee’s 1938 report on the value of counselling and 
assistance in education led to the recognition of counselling as a crucial service in India. 
Counseling and guidance were viewed as new, developing forces that were crucial to the 
educational system. In the 1980s and 1990s, there was not the same enthusiasm  and interest 
in counselling and guidance. The quantity of research material that was accessible for 
evaluation provided evidence of this fall in interest. Despite all of th is, there has been a sharp 
rise in demand for counselling services nationally in recent years. In 2005, the NCERT 
included counselling as a core service in its national framework curriculum. The school 
industry has given counselling the most attention. The CBSE decided to make qualified 
school counsellors a requirement for all of its schools during its National Conference in 2001. 
Over the past few years, more training alternatives have become accessible, ranging from 
67 
 
 
full-time postgraduate degree programmes to certifications and diplomas. Few university 
departments of psychology, education, and social work provide postgraduate degrees. There 
is a postgraduate diploma in guiding and counselling offered by NCERT, Government of 
India. Private organisations provide postgraduate certificates and diplomas in particular 
counselling areas. The option of distance learning is offered for certificate programmes. 
According to experts in this subject, India’s culture may have impacted by contemporary 
counselling practices. 
 Counselling’s actual nature and purpose are still not well understood. Since anyone 
can become a counsellor, there is currently no licencing system in place, and there is no 
organised way to keep track of skill development. The cultural sensitivity of current curricula 
was recently evaluated, and the results showed that relatively few Indian counselling models 
have developed (Arulmani, 2007). The effort appears to have been to adapt western ideas 
without much thought —if any —to ‘discovering’ fresh ideas and validating them for the 
context of India. A gradual  movement towards more varied counselling approaches is more 
encouraging. 
 Even though there aren’t many of these courses, the ones that do exist have useful 
learning objectives that aim to introduce students to the availability and potential of 
alternative healing methods with a particular emphasis on indigenous and culturally 
acceptable and used therapeutic approaches. The availability of counselling services is a 
serious issue. Less than 10% of the sample, according to a 2006 survey by Arulmani and Nag 
in 12 distinct Indian regions, had access to any kind of counselling. The function of a 
counsellor is also not entirely clear. The full spectrum of mental needs is covered by referrals 
to counsellors, from severe psychotic problems to concerns about parenting, childhood 
disorders, adolescent struggles, and reproductive health (including HIV/AIDS issues). Other 
types of referrals a counsellor might get include those involving marital conflict, 
interpersonal issues, academic and educational challenges, stress -related disorders, substance 
addiction, career development counselling, and inquiries concerning sexual orientation. 
Check Your Progress 
 17. Which college came to be identified with the guidance movement?  
 18. What is the contribution of NCERT and CBSE to the counselling movement in   
India? 
 
1.10 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions 
1. According to Pepinsky and Pepinsky (1954), counselling refers to an ‘interaction 
which occurs between two individuals called the counsellor and the client that takes 
place in a professional setting and is initiated and maintained to facilitate changes in 
the behaviour of the client’. 
2. Several misconceptions  are held by people about counselling. Some of the serious 
misconceptions held about counselling are as follows:  
a. Counselling is all about giving information, although some information giving can be  
a part of counselling. 
68 
 
b. Counselling is about giving advice, making suggestions and recommendations. 
3. Clinical psychology is a branch of psychology which is concerned with the 
description, classification, diagnosis, and prognosis of psychological illnesses.  
4. Some works during the testing movement which had a significant impact on the 
profession of counselling: 
a. Sir Francis Galton tried to devise a simple measure of intelligence.  
b. Binet’s development of first IQ tests; Lewis M. Terman’s administration of the test to 
a large population  
c. Edward L. Thorndike’s myriad contributions. 
5. Verbal behaviours like probing, requesting, clarification, re -statement and 
summarizing feelings and non -verbal behaviour like smiling, learning forward, 
making eye contact, gesturing and head moving indicate that the counsellor is 
interested in and is open to clients. Egan (1990), summarized five non -verbal skills as 
SOLER (smile, open-posture, learning forward, eye-contact and relax). 
6. Four possible benefits of an exit interview according to Ward (1984) are: 
a. It helps the clients resolve any positive feelings resulting from the counselling 
experiences itself. 
b. It serves as a way to invite the client to continue in counselling if the client so wishes. 
c. Another form of treatment or a different counsellor can be considered if the client 
wishes.  
d. It increases chances that next time the client needs help, he or she will seek 
counselling. 
7. Some of the dysfunctional reasons behind becoming a counsellor according to James 
Guy (1987) are as follows: 
a. Emotional distress: Some individuals who have unresolved personal traumas wish to 
become counsellors in order to deal with their emotional distress. 
b. Vicarious coping: Some people take up the profession of counselling as a way to live 
their lives through others. 
8. A comfortable and attractive room endowed with soft lightening, quiet colour, 
harmonious, and comfortable furniture (with an absence of clutter and distraction) 
should be used for counselling. A distance of 30 to 39 inches between the counsellor 
and client and chair of 90 degree angel from one another promote counselling 
relationship. 
9. Psychoanalysis seems to be effective in treating several disorders like hysteria, 
narcissism, obsessive compulsive disorder, anxiety, phobia, sexual difficulties, etc. 
(Arlow, 1989). 
69 
 
10. Some techniques used in existential counselling include (i) free to use techniques as 
widely diversified as desensitization and free association; (ii) confrontation; (iii) 
paradoxical intention (iv) imagery exercises, awareness exercises, and goal setting 
activities are borrowed from other models. 
11. Some common negative script patterns are: (i) never scripts; (ii) until scripts; (iii) 
always scripts; (iv) after scripts; and (v) open-ended scripts. 
12. Rational Emotive Therapy (RET) makes use of two primary techniques: teaching and 
disputing. 
13. The stages of helping according to Gerard Egan’s (2002) influential approach is 
organised around these three stages: 
a. Stage 1: What is happening? Assisting clients in identifying the main problems that 
require changing. 
b. Stage II: What options make sense to me in? Assisting clients in setting goals. 
c. Stage III:  What must I do to obtain what I require or desire? Assisting clients in 
creating plans to achieve goals 
14. The foundation skills for a helper according to Sue Culley and Tim Bond 
(2004) are: Attending and listening; Reflective skills; and Probing skills. 
 15. Krumboltz (1966) has given three criteria’s for judging counselling goals: 
a. The goal of counselling should be capable of being stated differently for each client. 
b. They should be compatible with the values of the counselling. 
c. The degree to which the goals are attained should be observable. 
16. The ultimate long range goals reflect the counsellor’s philosophy of life. It 
includes self -actualization, self -realization, self -enhancement and self -transcendence 
to make the client autonomous. 
17. The David Hare Training College in Calcutta came to be identified with the 
guidance movement. 
18. In 2005, the NCERT included counselling as a core service in its national 
framework curriculum. The school industry has given counselling the most attention. 
The CBSE decided to make qualified school counsellors a requirement for all of its 
schools during its National Conference in 2001. 
1.11 Summary 
• According to, Pepinsky and Pepinsky (1954), counselling refers to an ‘interaction 
which occurs between two individuals called the counsellor and the client that 
takes place in a professional setting and is initiated and maintained to facilitate 
changes in the behaviour of the client’. 
70 
 
• Problems can occur/recur during any point in life, therefore counselling must 
necessarily be an ongoing and continuing process concerning persons of all age 
levels and placed in different life situations. 
• Counselling is characterized as a professional activity or a process that deals with 
‘comparatively normal psychologically healthy people’. 
• The counselling profession has its foundations in: laboratory psychology; 
innovative approaches to the treatment of the ‘insane’; the mental hygiene 
movement; the mental testing movement; the influence of humanistic psychology; 
and the vocational guidance movement. 
• Despite all the early school theorists who tried to investigate the complexities of 
the human psyche, there were no psychological attempts to treat emotional 
problems or emotional illnesses.  
• Greatly influenced by Wundt’s work in Europe, several students from United 
States came to his laboratory to learn the new experimental methods being used 
there.  
• The impact of Existential approaches have been significant in the areas of 
vocational counselling, job training, personal work, and rehabilitation counselling. 
• The counselling process begins with the initial session. The initial counselling 
interview is often critical to the ultimate success or failure of the entire course of 
the counselling process.  
• Basic attending behaviour and client observation skills helps in establishing and 
maintaining rapport which is vital for the disclosure of information and the 
ultimate success of counselling. 
• Just as the initial interview and building of a sound client -counsellor relationship 
is essential for the counselling process to be effective, so is the careful termination 
of the counselling relationship. 
• When to terminate the relationship is a question that has no definite answer. If the 
relationship ends too soon, the client may regress to earlier behaviour but if 
termination is never addressed, client may become too dependent. 
• Patterson and Eisenberg (1983) note that resistance is especially likely when the 
counselling relationship has been of long duration or has involved a high level of 
intimacy. 
• Sometimes narcissistic and grandiose people take up the profession of counselling 
believing that all problems are resolved through the expression of love and 
tenderness. 
• Overall, the effectiveness of counselling depends on numerous variables including 
the background, education, skill and experience of the counsellor. 
71 
 
• Rollo May and others believe that individual who have experience some 
emotional distress and have been able to successfully resolve it are better able to 
connect with their clients authentically in ways not possible otherwise. 
• Before a counsellor can attempt to understand a client, he or she must have an 
objective and satisfying understanding of the self. Counsellors must be able to 
recognize and accept their strengths and weaknesses.  
• The qualities that help a counsellor to relate and communicate more effectively 
with the client are genuineness, non -dominance, listening, positive regard, and 
communication skills. 
• Most studies agree that personnel traits are important in determining counsellor’s 
effectiveness for e.g., Jovne (1981) found that counsellor’s personality 
characteristics are more important than skills. 
• According to Rogers (1962) it means prizing the client as a person regardless of 
his particular behaviour at the moment. 
• Building a relationship, the first stage of counselling, is a continuous process. It 
begins by having the counsellor win the battle for structure and the client win the 
battle for initiative. 
• Freud was the creator of the psychoanalytic approach. The Freudian view of 
human nature is essentially pessimistic, deterministic, mechanistic, and 
reductionalistic. 
• Behaviourists believe learning and thus development occurs in one of the three 
following ways: (i) Respondent learning; (ii) Operant Conditioning ; (iii) Social 
modelling. 
• Cognitive theories of counselling focus on thinking. They believe that thoughts 
influence feelings and behaviours. If a person changes a way of thinking, feelings 
and behaviours will get modified automatically.  
• Rational Emotional Therapy is based on the assumption that psychopathology is 
originally learned and aggravated by the inculcation of irrational beliefs from 
significant others during childhood. 
• An integrative approach to counselling and psychotherapy is best characterized by 
attempts to look beyond and across the confines of single -school approaches in 
order to see what can be learned from, and how clients can benefit from, other 
perspectives. 
• Helping is a bond created between two or more individuals with the intention of 
providing and receiving assistance. Helpers must be able to comprehend emotions 
and experiences by putting themselves in the client’s shoes. 
• Helpers focus on education, relationships, and working with others to put their 
knowledge into practise. But it also overlaps with the counselling field. They 
72 
 
achieve this not by adopting the role of counsellor but rather by having a specific 
type of skills. 
• Being in tune with oneself and other people (in fact, the entire world) is what 
compassion is. It embodies goodness at its most innate level. 
• It has been asserted that the relationship between the helper and the helped and 
who they are as persons determines whether the help is helpful or not. 
• Goals are important because it provides a sense of direction and purpose which 
are necessary for a meaningful evaluation of the usefulness of counselling. 
• The various goals of counselling also have certain limitations as counselling goals 
frequently have to ‘tailor-made’ to meet the realities of clients and their situations. 
• Naturally, the beginnings of psychology in India should be the starting point of the 
counselling movement in that country. The first Chair in psychology was endowed 
at the Mysore University in south India. 
 · In order to offer counselling on a small scale, voluntary private organisations 
were first created in Calcutta and thereafter in Bombay. The David Hare Training College in 
Calcutta came to be identified with the guidance movement. 
1.12 Key Words 
· Vocational Guidance: It is  the process that helps students to access their career 
development as well as helps to enhance their skills, interests, as well as capabilities. 
· Functionalist: Functionalism is a theory about the nature of mental states. According 
to functionalists, mental states are identified by what they do rather than by what they are 
made of. 
· APA: The American Psychological Association (APA) is the largest scientific and 
professional organization of psychologists in the United States, with over 133,000 members, 
including scientists, educators, clinicians, consultants, and students.  
· CBSE: The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) is a national level board 
of education in India for public and private schools, controlled and managed by the 
Government of India. 
1.13 Self-Assessment Questions and Exercises 
Short-Answer Questions 
1. What are the similarities and differences between counselling and psychotherapy? 
2. Briefly explain the qualities that should be possessed by an effective counsellor 
according to Belkin. 
3. Write a short note on the definition of helping. 
4. What are the different types of goals of counselling according to Narayan Rao and 
Patterson? 
73 
 
5. How did counselling develop in India? Briefly explain. 
Long-Answer Questions 
1. Discuss the evolution of counselling in detail. 
2. Explain the issues involved with the termination of counselling process. 
3. Describe RET therapy by Ellis in detail. 
4. Evaluate the fundamentals of humanistic counselling. 
5. Discuss the goals of counselling with respect to theoretical orientation and dimensions 
given by Nelson and Jones. 
1.14 Further Readings 
Corey, G. 2016. Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy . United 
States: Cengage Learning. 
Boivin, M. and A. Meier. 2010. Counselling and Therapy Techniques: Theory and Practice . 
United Kingdom: SAGE Publications. 
Tinsley, Howard E. A.; Noelle S. Giffin Wiersma; and Suzanne H. Lease (Ed.). 2015. 
Contemporary Theory and Practice in Counseling and Psychotherapy . United States:  SAGE 
Publications. 
Reeves, A. 2012. An Introduction to Counselling and Psychotherapy: From Theory to 
Practice. United Kingdom: SAGE Publications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
 
 
UNIT 2  BASIC COUNSELLING SKILLS 
 2.1 Objectives 
 2.2 Introduction 
 2.3 Counselling Techniques: Building Relationship, Core Conditions, and In-    
                         Depth  Exploration 
 2.3.1 Deeper Exploration Skills  
 2.4 Nature and Importance of Generic Skills of Counselling 
 2.4.1 Micro Skills of Counselling 
 2.4.2 Macro Skills of Counselling 
 2.4.3 Inside and Outside Skills of Counselling 
 2.4.4 Self-Monitoring Skills as a Counsellor 
 2.5 Indigenous Model of Counselling 
 2.6 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions 
 2.7 Summary 
 2.8 Key Words 
 2.9 Self-Assessment Questions and Exercises 
 2.10 Further Readings 
 
2.1 Objectives 
After going through this unit, you will be able to:  
• Discuss counselling techniques, along with generic, micro and macro counselling 
skills 
• Explain the inside-outside and self-monitoring skills of counselling 
• Describe the indigenous model of counselling 
2.2 Introduction 
In order to build a solid bond between the client and the therapist, effective counselling skills 
are essential. When combined, these skills provide clients with treatment support and assist 
them in achieving their objective of overcoming the demands of modern life and having a 
more happy life. To encourage and maintain the psychological process, counsellors can study 
and improve a variety of counselling skills, such as effective communication, problem 
solving, and goal setting, as well as teach coping mech anisms like self-talk and visualisation. 
In this unit, we will discuss the counselling techniques, along with the generic, micro and 
75 
 
macro counselling skills. It will also focus on inside -outside and self -monitoring skills of 
counselling, along with an indigenous model of counselling.  
2.3 Counselling Techniques: Building Relationship, Core Conditions, and In -Depth 
Exploration 
The successful outcome of any counselling relationship depends on the working alliance 
between the counsellor and the client (Gesto and Carter, 1985). Clients arrive in counselling 
with certain cues of their lives open or understood and other areas hidden or suppressed; this 
is often represented by a conceptual device called the ‘Johari Window’ (Luft, 1970). 
At this time, involvement and exploration phases of helping are involved. After they are 
completed the counsellor works with the client to move into the understanding and action 
phases (Carkhuff and Anthony, 1979).To work effectively through, these phases several skills 
(as follows) are involved: 
 ·Changing perceptions: Through the process of reframing, the counsellor helps the 
clients to change distorted unrealistic objective and to move from functional fixity to a more 
appropriate and realistic objective by offering them opportunity to explore ‘thoughts and 
desires within a safe, accepting and non-judgmental environment. Goals are refined or altered 
using cognitive, behaviour, or cognitive -behaviour strategies (Okun, 1987)’. Also reframing 
offers the client another probable viewpoint of why an event might have happened. 
 ·Leading: Counsellors may use leads that vary in length and depends on the 
counsellor’s theoretical orientation and current phase of counselling to change the client’s 
perceptions (Robinson, 1950). Leads like silence, acceptance, and paraphrasing may be more 
appropriate in the beginning of the counselling process, whereas, others like persuasion may 
be more appropriate in the understanding and action phases of counselling (Patterson and 
Eisenberg, 1982). 
 ·Multi-focussed responding: Ivey (1983) and Lazarus (1981) think that ‘tuning into 
the client’s major modes (visual, auditory, kinesthetic) of perceiving and learning is crucial in 
bringing about change’. Baruth and Huber (1985), also point out the importance of the 
counsellor’s responding in the client’s language. 
 ·Accurate empathy:  Primary accurate empathy helps in the establishment of the 
counselling relationship, in data gathering and in problem clarification. 
 ·Self-disclosure: to be effective, the counsellor’s self -disclosure should match the 
client’s needs (Hendrick, 1988). Selective and focussed self -disclosure serves to primary 
functions namely ——modelling and developing a new perspective (Egan, 1990). ‘Client’s 
are more likely to trust counsellors who disclose their own personal information and are 
prone to make reciprocal disclosure if the client/counsellor relationship is strong (Curtis, 
1981)’. 
 ·Immediacy: Involves counsellor’s understanding and communication of the client’s 
feelings, impressions and expectations and the wants of the counsellor (Turock, 1980). 
Relationship immediacy is the counsellor’s ability to discuss with the client the quality of this 
relationship, whether it is strained, boring or productive. Here -and-now immediacy is the 
discussion of any given transaction as it is happening (Egan, 1990). Misinterpretation of the 
76 
 
counsellor’s message, unexpected outcome, influence on the client’s decision to terminate the 
counselling session are three main fears counsellor’s have with regard to immediacy (Turock, 
1980). It is best used in a directionless relationship where there is question of trust, 
considerable social distance between counsellor and client, client dependency, counter -
dependency and where there is an attraction between counsellor and client (Egan, 1990). 
 ·Reflection: Emphatic mirroring of feelings behind the words is called reflection. 
 ·Humour: Sensitivity and timing on the part of the counsellor is most 
important.Humour can circumvent client resistance, dispel tension and reduce psychological 
pain (Ness, 1989). Through an experience of ‘ha-ha’ often comes an awareness of ‘ah-ah’ and 
a clearer perception of a situation. 
 ·Confrontation: It challenges clients to examine, modify and or control an aspect of 
behaviour. A good responsible, caring, and appropriate confrontation produces growth and 
encourages an honest examination of oneself. It should be used only when the relationship is 
strong. 
 ·Probing: Refers to the use of close -ended or open -ended questions to elicit 
information. Why question should be avoided as they make the client defensive. 
 ·Contracting: There are two aspects of contracting —one focuses on the processes 
involved in reaching the goal; the other concentrates on the final outcome. While making 
contracts the counsellor must consider the background of the client, client’s motivational 
levels, the nature of the present problem and what resources are available to the client to 
assure the successful completion of the contract. Thomas and Ezell (1972) lists several 
advantages as follows: 
• Provides a written record of goals the counsellor and the client have agreed to 
pursue and the course of action to be taken. 
• The formal nature of a contract and its time limits may act as motivator for a client 
who tends to procrastinate 
• If the contract is broken down into definable sections, a client may feel that 
problems can be solved 
• Puts responsibility for any change on the client and thus serves as motivation 
• By specifically outlining the number of sessions to be held, it assumes that the 
client will return to counselling on a more regular basis than would otherwise be 
the case. 
Some of the limitations of contracting according to Thomas and Ezell (1972) as follows: 
 · Counsellor cannot hold a client to a contract 
 · Some client problems may not lend themselves to the contract system 
 · Such a way of dealing with problems focuses on the outward behaviour 
 · Also, the initial appeal of the contract is limited. 
77 
 
 ·Rehearsal: Refers to practising designated behaviour overtly (verbalize or act out 
what is going to do) or covertly (imagine or reflect on the desired goals) (Cormier and 
Cormier,1991). In rehearsal the feedback given by counselling helps the client recognize and 
correct any problem area (Geis an Chapman, 1971). 
In addition to the specific skills involved, clients and counsellors must work through any 
transference or counter transference issues that arise out of earlier situations or present 
circumstances (Gelso and Carter, 1985). 
Transference is the projection by the client of the past or present feelings, attitudes or desires 
onto the counsellor (Brammer, Shostrom and Abrego, 1989). It may be direct (expressed 
directly) or indirect (revealed in client’s statements or actions that are not directly relate to the 
counsellor) or positive (less harming) or negative (very harmful to the positive relationship). 
According to Cavanagh (1982)’ both positive and negative transference are forms of 
resistance. 
Working through the transference helps the client have more trust and confidence in the 
counsellor. Insight into the past and thus become free to act differently in present and future. 
Counter-transference refers to the counsellor’s projection of emotional reactions towards the 
client (Hausen, Stevic and Warner, 1986), thereby destroying the objectivity which is 
detrimental to counselling relationship. One approach sees counter -transference as the direct 
or indirect unconscious reactions of the counsellor to the client. Other see it as a diagnostic 
tool for understanding aspects of the client’s unconscious motivation (Kernberg, 1975). Still 
another conceives it as possessing both the above positive and negative aspects (Blanck and 
Blanck, 1979). It may be manifested in a number of ways (Corey et al, 1988): 
· Constant desire of the counsellor to please the client 
· Identify with the clients problems thereby losing objectivity 
· Counsellor’s development of sexual or romantic feelings towards the client 
· Compulsive advice giving 
· A desire to develop a social relationship with the client 
Like clients, counsellors have blind spots, hidden areas and aspects of their lives that are 
unknown to them. Working in a supervisory relationship with another counsellor, monitoring 
one’s own audio and videotapes of counselling sessions and self -analysis are excellent ways 
to address countertransference. 
2.3.1 Deeper Exploration Skills  
Deeper exploration aims at helping clients discover their true self. In counselling, a client’s 
revelation of self or concerns may not be complete because of ‘hidden areas’ and ‘blind 
spots’. 
 ·Hidden areas: A client may not want to disclose some of his thoughts and feelings 
or even certain incidents of the past.  
 ·Blind spots: A client may not know his or her inner feelings. He is either dimly 
aware of them or totally unaware of certain dimensions of his personality and orientations.  
78 
 
Deeper explorations thus help deeper understanding of the client’s concerns. Egan (1986) 
refers to this as advanced empathy. A counsellor may go for deep probing using questions, 
statements and reflections. Alternatively, challenging can be used.  
Challenging  
Challenging is a powerful approach to shift the client from one perspective to another. Instead 
of retaining a frame of reference and struggling to fit everything in it, it seeks to explore a 
new perspective by taking a new route of exploration. This process helps to discover the 
unknown weaknesses and strengths of clients and leads to identification of more constructive 
and useful solutions. Challenging aims at the following:  
 ·Finding gaps in information by identifying deficits, discrepancies, uncertainty in 
outcomes, self-defeating beliefs and unexpressed feelings.  
 ·Probing deep to bridge the gaps in information by discovering hidden concerns.  
 ·Searching to find new vistas of thoughts and feelings, to find an expression so far 
undiscovered and the potential of the client. 
 Challenging can be done in many ways. However, to be effective, challenging should 
be purposeful and thought provoking. Some useful tips to challenging are given here. 
 ·Be tentative: As a rule, a counsellor should never take full control of the thought 
process of a client. As such, a proposed view should be tentative and open for modification. 
You might say: ‘I wonder whether…’, ‘I guess or my hunch is …’ ‘How will it be if you...’. 
 ·Do not blame: The aim of challenging is to find gaps, discrepancies and 
inconsistencies in thoughts and so on. The loopholes or loose ends are to be used for further 
exploration but not for negatively criticizing the client. Having a positive regard for the client 
is important for counselling. Acknowledge the inconsistencies in a subtle and gentle manner 
and seek information to gain new understanding.  
 ·Be concrete: A challenge should be specific and clear. Vague expressions do not 
help. They may result in the client deviating from the expected line of thought. As a result, 
interaction may become less useful and sometimes complex.  
 ·Persist to achieve: Challenging may require a series of questions and moving 
through a sequence of interactions. It cannot be done by a single question or statement. It 
requires pursuing all the aspects under consideration till a full picture is obtained.  
Types of challenges  
There are a good number of alternative challenging strategies. These are given in brief in the 
following lines:  
 ·Confrontation: The counsellor confronts the client to make him aware of any faulty, 
distorted and baseless feelings or views that have been immobilizing or disempowering his 
personality. Weak-minded people try to hide their weaknesses by saying aloud something 
which they neither intend to do nor are capable of doing. They resort to the following actions. 
79 
 
o Rationalizing: They try to supply logic to their thoughts or actions. Consider this 
example: Client: I lost my job. There is an economic meltdown. Everybody is losing 
their jobs. 
o Delaying: Some clients keep on postponing actions to avoid facing them. Maybe they 
have bitter feelings or fear in facing them.  
o Blaming others: This is common in most cases. Instead of accepting the failure 
people often ‘pass the buck’ to others. They find relief in blaming others for their 
involvement or contribution. Though it is irrational and unacceptable, people do it to 
retain their identity or safeguard their ego. 
· Self-confrontation: The counsellor asks the client to talk to himself, pointing 
out his weaknesses and strengths. Generally, clients may either concentrate on self -
blame or self -praise. The client has to be guided to take a balanced view. It should 
help them to see through themselves and listen to themselves. Such self -examination 
and introspection will enhance their own understanding.  
· Feedback: Feedback refers to return communication to the client based on 
what the client has said. Such a communication should aim at helping the client to 
take a new angle or explore a new dimension. Feedback can be both positive and 
negative. See the example cited here:  
  Client: I hate my boss. I don’t think I can work under him. 
  Counsellor: You said in the beginning you liked him a lot. 
  Client: Yes! But not now. I put up with him all these days. 
  Counsellor: You have tolerance toward mistakes. (Positive feedback) 
 Client: I have tolerated the mistakes of many. Take the case of my team 
leader. He took so many wrong decisions. I told him several times to be more careful. 
What did he do in return? He pointed out his failures as my mistakes. I hate him. 
  Counsellor: You said you hate your team leader. 
Client: Yes. Not only for blaming me unnecessarily but also for saying it in 
front of others. 
Counsellor: You seem to be emotional and quick in forming impressions. 
(Negative feedback) 
· Additional information: Clients may lack the information necessary to make 
radical and different decisions. In career counselling, for example, the client 
may not have information about the career options or educational 
opportunities. Make sure that the information provided to the client has the 
following characteristics. 
o Relevant: Check for the relevance of the information to the client based on 
understanding of attitudes, expectations and capabilities.  
80 
 
o Precise: Information has value when put in precise form. Unnecessary elaboration 
leads to information overload and sometimes the right information may be lost in the 
maze.  
o Concrete: Information must be clear and realistic. It should be action -oriented and 
practical.  
o Not advice: Information should be neutral in presentation. It should not suggest an 
action to the client. It should be descriptive and not prescriptive.  
·Directives: A powerful way of challenging is instructing the client to do a particular 
thing. Examples:  
o ‘Say more about your feelings.’ 
o ‘Explain more about your experience.’  
o ‘Do not shift from this; elaborate and explain.’  
Immediacy 
Immediacy refers to focusing on the present. This is helpful in two contexts:  
 ·To focus on the future: Generally, the thought process progresses from past to 
present and present to future. After the client has finished talking about past events, feelings 
and views relating to his or her concerns, consolidating the discussion for future thinking is 
important. It is pertinent to focus on the present. Relevant questions are: What are your 
feelings now? How do you view your concerns today? 
 ·To move when stuck: When both the counsellor and the client are stuck during their 
interaction, the counsellor may use this tactic to progress. By opening a new window, he can 
lead the client to think about the issue with renewed energy.  
 ·To examine relationships: Another aspect that requires attention is the client –
counsellor relationship. Factors like trust and emotional feelings require scrutiny. 
o Is the relationship going to increase dependence on the counsellor in future?  
o Will the relationship, on termination, result in bitter feelings and negative thoughts in 
the client?  
o Is the relationship leading to unethical sexual relations or victimization of the client in 
any way? 
Check Your Progress 
 1. Define countertransference.  
 2. What are the limitations of contracting?  
2.4 Nature and Importance OF Generic Skills of Counselling 
A well-trained counsellor is a professional who can combine science with art. His approach to 
problem solving will be scientific and creative whereas his interactions with the client will be 
81 
 
humanistic. A client comes for counselling not only with a problem (latent or manifest) but 
also with emotions like fear, anger, disgust, etc.,  
 
These emotions, together with information they have about counselling, will form a set of 
expectations—positive or negative in the client’s mind. Some of the positive emotions are:  
·Effortless understanding: The counsellor is an expert; he will know my problems 
without my doing much talking.  
·Quick solution: The counsellor will immediately remove all my sufferings. He has a 
magic wand.  
·Right answer: I need not struggle any longer to find a solution. The counsellor has 
the right answers.  
 ·Enthusiasm: Well! From tomorrow I will be different. I am meeting a counsellor.  
 ·Relief: Thank God! I have a counsellor. I am not alone. He will support me.  
Understanding the client’s expectations and hopes will open the doors for interaction. How 
can a client be motivated to talk? By knowing his fears and hopes, by showing concern for 
him and by instilling confidence in him and encouraging him to play an active role in the 
process.  
Counsellors are also not immune to expectations. Based on the voice they hear over the 
phone and remarks made on the referral (‘a difficult person who speaks aimlessly’), a 
counsellor may be prejudiced. Professional counsellors should have a positive attitude 
towards a client and be enthusiastic about the case.  
A skilful counsellor will avoid behaviour that can create barriers in the counselling process.  
The qualities of an effective counsellor are as follows:  
 ·Concern for client: In general, counsellors will listen without interrupting or 
imposing their own values and beliefs. They will give the client space to explore their 
thoughts, feelings or behaviour. People often find it helpful just to have their concerns taken 
seriously. 
 ·Versatility: The counsellor may also employ a variety of techniques to help the 
client understand his feelings.  
 ·Positive regard: Many people meet counsellors with an uncertain mind which they 
express as follows: ‘You’ll think this is silly...’, ‘I don’t really know why I’m here…’, ‘I just 
can’t shift…’ or ‘I feel so guilty…’. Mutual respect improves the chances of changing (or 
maintaining) behaviour and achieving outlined goals. 
 ·Assurance of confidentiality: Counselling takes place in privacy and assures 
confidentiality of disclosures.  
 ·Source of help: Counselling is an effective mechanism for discharging hurt and thus 
recovering the ability to think rationally in any situation. A child who is experiencing, or has 
experienced hurt, will typically find someone —often an adult —and try to get that person’s 
82 
 
attention. The child will then talk actively, laugh, sweat, shiver, throw a tantrum, cry or yawn. 
If the adult can continue to hold the child, perhaps give a warm hug, the child’s pain will 
gradually subside. 
 ·Self-awareness and cultural awareness:  The counsellor must be fully aware of his 
values, needs and biases prior to counselling employees. Self -aware supervisors are less 
likely to allow their biases to influence the counselling process. In addition, supervisors need 
to be cognizant of the similarities and differences between individuals of different cultural 
backgrounds and how these factors may influence values, perspectives and actions.  
 ·Empathy: Empathy allows the counsellor to see the situation from the other person’s 
point of view. It provides a grounding effect on the plan of action, ensuring that it is feasible 
and achievable from the perspective of the employer and employee.  
 ·Credibility: Supervisors achieve credibility by being honest and consistent in their 
statements and actions.  
 ·Neutrality: Common errors made by supervisors when conducting counselling 
sessions are:  
o Personal bias  
o Rash judgements  
o Stereotyping  
o Losing emotional control  
o Inflexible counselling methods  
o Improper follow-up  
 ·Flexibility: The counselling style should fit the character of the employee and to the 
relationship desired. The situation should always dictate the style of counselling. Keeping this 
in mind, the counselling styles can change during the counselling session and the counsellor 
should not stick to any one style. 
 ·Supportiveness: Subordinates should be encouraged through actions of the 
counsellors. 
2.4.1 Micro Skills of Counselling 
Micro skills are specialised abilities a counsellor might employ to improve client interaction. 
These abilities allow a counsellor to effectively form a professional relationship and include 
clients in meaningful and beneficial conversation. Five of these fundamental counselling 
techniques will be briefly discussed in this article. We have already discussed these skills as 
generic skills. However, here we will discuss these in detail. Individually or collectively, they 
can assist a client in accessing their most inner thoughts or clarifying their future aspirations. 
Micro skill 1: Attending behaviour 
The behavioural component of developing rapport is attending. A counsellor must let a client 
know they are interested in listening to them and supporting them when they first meet. The 
counsellor can encourage the client to discuss and be candid about their concerns by being 
83 
 
present. In Western culture, making eye contact with another person while speaking or 
listening to them is crucial and polite. To demonstrate real interest in what the client is 
saying, the counsellor must make normal eye contact with them. 
According to Geldard and Geldard (2001), counsellors might incorporate non -verbal 
behaviour into their toolkit to help clients unwind. It may take some practice to master this 
talent, but it all starts with a counsellor seating in the same position as the client. The client is 
likely to follow suit if rapport between the client and counsellor has started to develop. 
Consequently, the client’s anxiety levels will go down. Although talking and listening make 
up the majority of counselling sessions, silence can occasionally have significant 
consequences on the client. We hurry to fill in the blanks when we first start out as 
counsellors because silence can feel a bit awkward, but as our experience builds, we learn to 
be more at ease with the idea of just ‘being’ with the client. 
Micro skill 2: Questioning 
During the counselling session, asking questions can help to uncover fresh discussion 
 topics. They can help the counsellor identify a problem and clarify material that at 
first glance could be unclear. A client’s path of self-discovery may be aided by questions that 
prompt thought or memory. Counsellors should be educated about the many kinds of 
questioning strategies, including when to use them and what to expect from the answers. It’s 
also critical to be mindful of and cautious with excessive questioning. A client may come to 
believe that the counsellor has all the answers if they are asked too many questions, since it 
conveys to them that the counsellor is in -charge. It is crucial to take into account the 
personality of the client, their continuous relationship with the counsellor, and the issue or 
issues at hand while choosing successful questioning tactics. In counselling, there are 
primarily two sorts of questions used: Closed and Open. 
 · Open questions: Open questions are those that cannot be answered in a few 
words, they encourage the client to speak and offer an opportunity for the counsellor to gather 
information about the client and their concerns. Typically open questions begin with: what, 
why, how or could. For example: 
o What has brought you here today? 
o Why do you think that? 
o How did you come to consider this? 
o Could you tell me what brings you here today? 
  ‘How’ queries frequently prompt the client to discuss their emotions. The 
answers to ‘what’ inquiries are more frequently facts. ‘When’ queries reveal information 
about its timing, which may include events and details that occurred before or after the 
problem. ‘Where’ inquiries provide information on the setting, circumstance, or location 
where an important event has occurred, while ’Why’ questions typically tell the counsellor of 
the causes of the occurrence or details that preceded it. It should be highlighted that the 
counsellor must use caution when posing ’why’ queries. Asking customers why can make 
them feel defensive. 
84 
 
 · Closed questions: Closed questions are questions that can be answered with a 
minimal response (often as little as ‘yes’ or ‘no’). They can help the counsellor to focus on 
the client or gain very specific information. Such questions begin with: is, are or do. For 
example: 
o Is that your coat? 
o Are you living alone? 
o Do you enjoy your job? 
  Ivey & Ivey (2003) describe the following five problematic questioning 
techniques: There is a very real risk of employing too many questions or questioning 
strategies that can have a detrimental effect on the session, even though questioning 
techniques can be used positively to explain concerns essential to the counselling session. 
When used inappropriately at the wrong moment by an untrained interviewer or counsellor, a 
client may experience undue discomfort and confusion. 
 · Bombardment/grilling: This occurs when counsellors get caught up into a 
pattern of asking too many questions one after the other. In doing this, the counsellor is 
always deciding which issue should be discussed next. 
 · Multiple questions: This occurs when counsellors ask several questions at 
once. For example: ‘Please tell me about yourself’; ‘how old are you’; ‘where were you 
born’; ‘do you have any children’; and ‘what do you do for a living?’. 
 · Questions as statements: This occurs when counsellors use questions as a 
way to sell their own point of views. For example, ‘Don’t you think it would be helpful if you 
studied more?’, ‘What do you think of trying relaxation exercises instead of what you are 
doing now?’, etc. 
 · Questions and cultural differences: This is where a counsellor needs to be 
aware of any cultural influences that may make asking questions inappropriate for clients 
from a specific culture. For example, the rapid -fire North American questioning style is often 
received less favourably by other cultures. 
 · Why questions: This is where the counsellor asks too many why questions. 
For example ‘Why did you do that?’ 
Micro skill 3: Confrontation 
In most cases, the term ’confrontation’ refers to confronting someone over a difference of 
opinion. However, in counselling, confrontation is an attempt by the therapist to gently attract 
the client’s attention to something that they may have missed or ignored. There are three steps 
to a confrontation.  
 · Identifying mixed or inconsistent messages (expressed through the client’s 
non-verbal or vocal behaviours) is the first step.  
 · The second phase calls for the counsellor to help the client become aware of 
these discrepancies and work through them.  
85 
 
 · The third and final step entails assessing the intervention’s effectiveness in 
light of the client’s development and transformation. 
During the counselling process there are four (4) discrepancies which the client could display. 
The discrepancy can be between: 
· Thoughts and feelings 
· Thoughts and actions 
· Feelings and actions or 
· A combination of thoughts, feelings and actions. 
Having identified a discrepancy, the counsellor highlights this to the client, using a 
confrontation statement such as ‘On the one hand …, but on the other hand…’. This is a 
standard and useful format for the actual confrontation. Of course, you may also use 
variations such as: ‘You say…but you do…,’ or ‘Your words say…but your actions say ….’. 
For example: ‘Your words say you would like to spend more time with your sister, but your 
actions say that it’s not a priority for you.’ 
Micro skill 4: Focusing 
Ivey and Ivey (2003) have identified seven areas a counsellor can focus on in the counselling 
session to bring about broader perspectives and potential solutions. The first is individual 
focus, in which the counsellor starts the counselling session by concentrating only on the 
client’s personal characteristics, background, and motivations for seeking counselling. To 
help bring the client’s attention completely to them, the counsellor will frequently utilise the 
client’s name. For instance: ‘Joan, tell me a little about yourself’ or ‘Are you the family’s 
eldest daughter, Joan?’  
The second is: Main emphasis or issues. The client’s motivation for seeking counselling is 
taken into consideration. The client will frequently discuss acquaintances, coworkers, 
extended family members, and other people who are somehow connected to the reason the 
client is seeking counselling because no problem is genuinely isolated. It is necessary to be 
flexible in the concept of ’family,’ as it can mean different things to different people, 
depending on whether they are talking about nuclear, traditional, single -parent, or close 
friends who are given family titles like ‘Aunt’ or ‘Uncle’. The client’s response to the 
counsellor is the subject of the mutuality since this could be a sign of how the client is 
growing in their relationships with other people. The counsellor asks, ’How can we work 
together?’ in an effort to place the client and counsellor on an equal footing. At this time, 
question like ‘how would you like me to assist you with this situation?’ is appropriate.  
The counsellor will be able to recognise how a client’s upbringing has influenced them, but 
this understanding can be expanded to include additional factors including gender, race, 
ethnicity, religion, and socio-economic status to better understand the client as they are in the 
present. 
Micro skill 5: Reflection  
The deeply held beliefs and meanings that underlie life experiences are referred to as 
reflection on the meaning of life. Counsellors that incorporate reflection into their practice 
86 
 
may discover that their clients delve deeper into the details of their own life experiences. 
Imagine, for instance, that two people go on a vacation to the same island resort at the same 
time of the year. One of them extols the wonders of sunsets, strolls down the beach, and a 
relaxed way of life. While the other laments on their boredom, discomfort from the sun, and 
heat. This example shows how different people’s interpretations of the same event can be 
completely different from one another. Consequently, the ability to reflect on meaning is to 
assist clients to explore their values and goals in life, by understanding the deeper aspects of 
their experiences. 
2.4.2 Macro Skills of Counselling 
By allowing clients to see their difficulties in the context of larger issues, macro counselling 
techniques assist clients gain a deeper grasp of the significance of their issues and their 
capacity for change. To solve the following problems, macro knowledge is required: 
 · Drawbacks of human situations: They are susceptible to anxieties about 
suffering, disease, injury, aging, and death as fragile living beings. They are vulnerable to 
anxiety, despair, aggression, and mood swings since they are emotional beings. The 
difficulties of clients are made more relatable by these common human experiences. 
 · Good things about people: By utilising the innate human desire for 
significance, fulfilment, and growth, we can rekindle our clients’ drive for self -preservation 
and constructive transformation. 
 · Social, economic, political, and cultural influences: We can lessen our 
clients’ propensity for self -blame and at the same time make them aware of the greater 
struggle for social justice and human rights by acknowledging how these macro forces can 
shape and limit individual values and behaviours. 
 · Underlying stories of myths, religions, and tales: They become aware of 
transcendental sources of wisdom and inspiration that can be uplifting and life -changing by 
connecting their issues to an acceptable and chosen overarching story. 
2.4.3 Inside and Outside Skills of Counselling 
Counsellors use their interpersonal and professional abilities to better understand and interact 
with their clients. These abilities enable a counsellor to assist a client in overcoming 
challenges standing in the way of living a happy life. These abilities enable you to develop a 
connection with your clients, win their trust, and make sure they feel heard and understood. 
As the word implies, inside skills could refer to the qualities that should be possessed by a 
counsellor to solve the issues of their clients. These qualities include patience, self -
awareness, empathy, etc. On the other hand, outside skills refer to how a counsellor should 
behave outwardly. These include body language, communication, attending behaviour, etc. 
We have already discussed these as part of generic, macro, and micro skills. 
2.4.4 Self-Monitoring Skills as a Counsellor 
To maintain track of your own behaviours and performance, counsellors should practise self -
monitoring. Self-monitoring is a personality attribute that entails the capacity to keep track of 
and control one’s appearance, feelings, and actions in response to social contexts and 
circumstances. It entails being conscious of your actions and how they affect your 
87 
 
surroundings. Additionally, it describes your capacity to change your behaviour in reaction to 
environmental, situational, or social factors. Self -monitoring practitioners are more inclined 
to alter their conduct to fit or comply with the circumstance. People lacking self -monitoring 
skills have a propensity to act in accordance with their own internal demands and sensations. 
Being conscious of oneself can help a counsellor establish ’ego boundaries’ and distinguish 
between what is theirs and what belongs to their clients. In addition, self -awareness allows 
the counsellor to ’consciously use the self.’ The skill enables the counsellors to gain a deeper 
understanding of themselves, making them less likely to delve on their own personal 
problems and instead focus on treating clients’ problems. Depending on the objective it seeks 
to achieve, Self-monitoring can be broadly classified into two major categories: 
· Acquisitive: Self-monitoring that is acquisitive seeks out other people’s attention and 
acceptance. It entails evaluating how other people are reacting and changing behaviour in a 
way that will help the person fit in or attract attention, prestige, or power. 
· Protective: This kind of Self -monitoring is meant to shield the person from other 
people’s judgement. People will keep an eye on the circumstances and reactions before 
modifying their own behaviour in a way that the group will find acceptable. This is done to 
avoid public humiliation and rejection. 
People might be impacted by Self -monitoring in many different ways. The ability to keep an 
eye on oneself helps extroverted persons engage with others and adjust to various social 
circumstances. People who employ Self-monitoring in this way are frequently liked and have 
good interpersonal skills. Other times, social anxiety may induce people to self-monitor. They 
pay a lot of attention to how other people are acting as well as how they believe others may 
see them since they are awkward in social situations. When dealing with others, people may 
find it challenging to unwind and be themselves due to their hypervigilance, which can also 
frequently make them feel more anxious. 
People with social anxiety are made to feel even more self -conscious about their actions in 
social situations when they engage in excessive self -monitoring. It is significant to remember 
that depending on the circumstance, self -monitoring may be beneficial or harmful. High -self 
monitors excel in making adjustments to the environment and interacting with others. 
Although they could be perceived as ‘fake’. In some situations, it is also a social ability that 
can foster interpersonal peace. People who have little self-monitoring are less inclined to alter 
their conduct to fit in. In some situations, this might be viewed as hostile or even antisocial 
behaviour. It can also indicate strong individualism and a lack of interest in following social 
norms in others. 
For a counsellor, self -monitoring is one of the most useful tools. This skill enables the 
counsellor to examine his or her own beliefs, sentiments, and biases during a therapeutic 
session. Without this procedure, counsellors risk reacting to their subconscious conditioning. 
The ability to relate to your clients more effectively as a counsellor will improve as self -
monitoring grows. A counsellor’s professional and personal development can both benefit 
from this skill. The self -monitoring process provides a t ool for tracking goal achievement 
over the course of the counselling relationship and aids counsellors in collaboratively 
working with clients to set goals and ways of evaluating progress toward those goals. Self -
88 
 
monitoring therefore functions as both a part of the counselling intervention process and a 
way to get evaluative data that may help with accountability goals. 
2.5 Indigenous Model of Counselling 
Indigenous therapy is the process of aiding people to deal with reality in their most recent 
social lives based on local knowledge, beliefs, and way of life, principles and practices. 
Counsellors must take into account ethnic and religious values because culture is ingrained in 
human beings. This is furthered by the perception of the Eastern resistance to Western 
counselling theory, which promotes the growth of indigenous counselling concepts. This 
shows that indigenous counselling develops through the use of counselling that is linked to 
cultural and religious values to produce something unique in the methodologies, 
interventions, strategies, and counselling approaches. In indigenous counselling, there are 
three types of criteria that are used: (1) Adding a few cultural and religious components to the 
application of pre-existing counselling; (2) Modifying the counselling approach with cultural 
and religious components; and (3) Adopting cultural and religious components to create a 
new counselling approach. 
While therapeutic counselling is gradually becoming more popular in urban centres, there is a 
need for indigenous therapy models for successful intervention and result in India. This is 
since Indian subcontinent residents have a distinct culture and worldview than what European 
and American views propose. There are no culture -specific theories that could define human 
behaviour, even though some Indian therapists incorporate yoga and meditation techniques 
into the counselling and psychotherapy processes (Clay, 2002). However, there are some 
exclusive counselling practices with specific settings and stages that could affect the therapy 
process and outcome for Indian clients. It is well -accepted that culture has a substantial 
impact on how well therapy works in counselling and psychotherapy. 
Psychologists are increasingly aware that, contrary to what the broad Euro -American 
psychological theories imply, individuals from other ethno -cultural groups do actually have 
distinctive ways of thinking, acting, and behaving. The background impacts of human factors, 
particularly the tradition, worldview, social, environmental, and geographic conditions of the 
clients, should be taken into consideration by a successful therapist. For a better outcome, 
therapy needs to combine and embrace Indian worldview, cultural background, and 
distinctive traditional healing practices. Comprehensive theories to explain the Indian psyche, 
various developmental patterns, and human behaviour also need to be constructed. It would 
be quite difficult to develop such an indigenous counselling and psychotherapy model while 
combining the current belief system and existing conventional techniques.  
Indigenous counselling offers a secure, nurturing environment that respects indigenous 
wisdom, healing, and experience. In order to understand the different cultural backgrounds of 
various clients, a counsellor needs to approach mental health and life concerns from an 
indigenous perspective. 
Check Your Progress 
 3. What is the difference between inside and outside skills?  
 4. What is self-monitoring?  
 5. What are the different types of criteria that are used in indigenous counselling? 
89 
 
 
2.6 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions 
1. Countertransference refers to the counsellor’s projection of emotional reactions 
towards the client, thereby destroying the objectivity which is detrimental to 
counselling relationship. 
2. Some of the limitations of contracting according to Thomas and Ezell (1972) as 
follows: 
a. Counsellor cannot hold a client to a contract 
b. Some client problems may not lend themselves to the contract system 
c. Such a way of dealing with problems focuses on the outward behaviour 
d. Also, the initial appeal of the contract is limited. 
3. Inside skills could refer to the qualities that should be possessed by a counsellor to 
solve the issues of their clients. These qualities include patience, self -awareness, 
empathy, etc. On the other hand, outside skills refer to how a counsellor should 
behave outwardly. These include body language, communication, attending 
behaviour, etc.  
4. Self-monitoring is a personality attribute that entails the capacity to keep track of and 
control one’s appearance, feelings, and actions in response to social contexts and 
circumstances. It entails being conscious of your actions and how they affect your 
surroundings. 
5. In indigenous counselling, there are three types of criteria that are used: (1) Adding a 
few cultural and religious components to the application of pre -existing counselling; 
(2) Modifying the counselling approach with cultural and religious components; and 
(3) Adopting cultural and religious components to create a new counselling approach. 
2.7 Summary 
• The successful outcome of any counselling relationship depends on the working 
alliance between the counsellor and the client. 
• Counsellors may use leads that vary in length and depends on the counsellor’s 
theoretical orientation and current phase of counselling to change the client’s 
perceptions (Robinson, 1950). 
• Relationship immediacy is the counsellor’s ability to discuss with the client the 
quality of this relationship, whether it is strained, boring or productive. 
• Transference is the projection by the client of the past or present feelings, 
attitudes or desires onto the counsellor. 
• Counsellors are also not immune to expectations. Based on the voice they hear 
over the phone and remarks made on the referral (‘a difficult person who speaks 
aimlessly’), a counsellor may be prejudiced. 
90 
 
• In general, counsellors will listen without interrupting or imposing their own 
values and beliefs. They will give the client space to explore their thoughts, 
feelings or behaviour. 
• The counselling style should fit the character of the employee and to the 
relationship desired. The situation should always dictate the style of counselling. 
• In general, counsellors will listen without interrupting or imposing their own 
values and beliefs. They will give the client space to explore their thoughts, 
feelings or behaviour. 
• Counselling is an effective mechanism for discharging hurt and thus recovering 
the ability to think rationally in any situation. 
• Micro skills are specialised abilities a counsellor might employ to improve client 
interaction. These abilities allow a counsellor to effectively form a professional 
relationship and include clients in meaningful and beneficial conversation. 
• By allowing clients to see their difficulties in the context of larger issues, macro 
counselling techniques assist clients gain a deeper grasp of the significance of 
their issues and their capacity for change. 
• By allowing clients to see their difficulties in the context of larger issues, macro 
counselling techniques assist clients gain a deeper grasp of the significance of 
their issues and their capacity for change. 
• For a counsellor, self -monitoring is one of the most useful tools. This skill 
enables the counsellor to examine his or her own beliefs, sentiments, and biases 
during a therapeutic session. 
• Indigenous therapy is the process of aiding people to deal with reality in their 
most recent social lives based on local knowledge, beliefs, and way of life, 
principles and practices. 
• While therapeutic counselling is gradually becoming more popular in urban 
centres, there is a need for indigenous therapy models for successful intervention 
and result in India. 
• Indigenous counselling offers a secure, nurturing environment that respects 
Indigenous wisdom, healing, and experience. 
2.8 Key Words 
·Mutuality: It is the sharing of a feeling, action, or relationship between two or more 
parties. 
·Therapeutic Counselling: It helps people improve their mental, emotional and 
physical health while encouraging positive relationships with self, others and the 
larger community.  
 
91 
 
2.9 Self-Assessment Questions and Exercises 
Short-Answer Questions 
 1. What is the significance of macro skills in a counsellor? 
 2. What do you mean by self-monitoring skills in counselling? Briefly explain. 
Long-Answer Questions 
 1. Discuss counselling techniques in detail. 
 2. Explain the micro skills that should be possessed by a counsellor. 
2.10 Further Readings 
Corey, G. 2016. Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy . United 
States: Cengage Learning. 
Boivin, M. and A. Meier. 2010. Counselling and Therapy Techniques: Theory and Practice . 
United Kingdom: SAGE Publications. 
Tinsley, Howard E. A.; Noelle S. Giffin Wiersma; and Suzanne H. Lease (Ed.). 2015. 
Contemporary Theory and Practice in Counseling and Psychotherapy . United States:  SAGE 
Publications. 
Reeves, A. 2012. An Introduction to Counselling and Psychotherapy: From Theory to 
Practice. United Kingdom: SAGE Publications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 
 
UNIT 3  SPECIFIC COUNSELLING SKILLS 
 3.1 Objectives 
 3.2 Introduction 
 3.3 Facilitating Problem Solving 
  3.2.1 Assessment Tools  
  3.2.2 Paraphrasing and Reflecting Feelings 
  3.2.3 Asking Questions  
  3.2.4 Self-Disclosing 
 3.4 Other Skills: Interviewing Skills 
  3.3.1 Interviewing Skills 
  3.3.2 Listening Skills in Counselling 
  3.3.3 Monitoring Skills in Counselling 
  3.3.4 Training Clients in Relaxation 
  3.3.5 Improving Client’s Self-Talk and Self-Perception 
 3.5 Terminating Helping 
  3.4.1 Resistance to Termination 
 3.6 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions 
 3.7 Summary 
 3.8 Key Words 
 3.9 Self-Assessment Questions and Exercises 
 3.10 Further Readings 
3.1 Introduction 
We have already discussed the basic counselling skills which are needed by any counsellor in 
their profession. However, there are some specific skills that make the counselling even more 
effective. In this unit, we will discuss the problem -solving techniques such as paraphrasing 
and reflecting feelings, along with the asking questions and self -disclosing. It will also focus 
on other skills like interviewing, listening, and monitoring skills of counselling, along with 
the process of terminating counselling.  
3.2 Objectives 
After going through this unit, you will be able to:  
 · Discuss the problem-solving techniques used in counselling 
 · Explain the interviewing, listening, and monitoring skills of counselling 
93 
 
 · Describe the process of terminating counselling 
3.3 Facilitating Problem Solving 
In case of problem -solving it is important to assess the problems faced by clients. But the 
question is: How do counsellors assess the problems that clients face? What type of 
procedures may be adopted? What kind of techniques can be made use of?  Before learning 
specific tools and techniques for assessing human characteristics, let us first recognize some 
basic guidelines for effective assessment. 
 · Each individual is unique:  Assessment is a means of increasing 
understanding of the uniqueness of an individual in terms of traits, emotions and behaviour.  
 · Differences exist among individuals:  Each person is unique as well as 
distinct from others. This principle notes that individual assessment seeks to identify the 
strengths and positive attributes of a person, as well as weaknesses and shortcomings. 
 · Assessment requires direct participation of individuals: Assessment will be 
complete and accurate only when the individual is willingly and directly involved. This 
involvement includes inputs by the client, feedback and clarification. In addition, it implies 
taking a standardized test or completing a questionnaire.  
 · Accuracy depends on instruments and individuals:  The effective choice 
and utilization of assessment techniques is important to obtain reliable and valid measures. 
The client and the counsellor should take part in the assessment process in an unbiased 
manner.  
 · Assessment is bound by professional codes: It is important for counsellors to 
be aware of the relevant ethical guidelines established by their professional organizations. 
These guidelines are aimed at protecting both the client and the professional practitioner.  
3.3.1 Assessment Tools  
Assessment tools can be categorized into two sets:  
 · Standardized testing tools:  Intelligence tests, aptitude tests, interest 
inventories and personality tests.  
 · Non-standardized testing tools:  Observation, Socratic questionnaires, 
Alderian questionnaire, lifestyle analysis.  
Intelligence testing 
Intelligence testing procedures have matured with successive developments in design and 
procedures. The first intelligence tests were designed by the Frenchman Alfred Binet to be 
administered to individual students. In the early 1900s, this led to several American versions. 
The most popular of these was the Stanford -Binetest (1916) followed by the Wechsler Scales 
developed by David Wechsler, based on the assumption that intelligence was the sum total of 
the individual’s ability to think in a rational manner, to act purposefully, and to deal in an 
effective way with his or her environment. The scales record three scores:  
 · Verbal ability  
94 
 
 · Performance ability  
 · General ability  
The Wechsler Test III (WISC -III, 1991) for ages six to sixteen years, allows for the 
computing of four index scores of: 
· Verbal comprehension  
· Perceptual organization  
· Freedom from distractibility  
· Processing speed 
Another popular test was the Kaufman instrument which contained sixteen subtests of mental 
and processing skills, which yield five major scores in Sequential Processing, Simultaneous 
Processing, Mental Processing Composite, Achievement, and Non -verbal. The Otis -Lennon 
School Ability Test (OLSAT) came in 1918 as the Otis Group Intelligence Scale and later 
achieved great popularity in both industry and education as the Otis -Quick Scoring Mental 
Abilities Test.  
Aptitude tests 
Aptitude may be defined as a trait that indicates an individual’s ability to perform or learn in 
a given area. Aptitude tests assist a person in making educational and career decisions. They 
serve the following purposes:  
 · Identify the potential abilities of a person  
· Help predict the level of academic or vocational success a person might 
anticipate 
 · Assist in forming groups or teams for training or operations 
(a) Special aptitude tests 
Special aptitude tests help measure a person’s potential ability to perform or acquire 
proficiency in a specific area. These are sometimes referred to as single aptitude tests or 
component ability tests because they only secure a measure of one specific aptitude or a 
single special ability.  
(b) Aptitude batteries  
 A series of sub-tests related in varying combinations to a series of occupations may be called 
aptitude batteries. Batteries offer more convenience in measuring and comparing potential 
abilities than single tests. The General Aptitude Test Battery (GATB) used by the United 
States Employment Service, is very popular. 
(c) Scholastic aptitude tests 
Scholastic or academic aptitude tests propose to measure a person’s potential for performing 
in academic situations. Tests that constitute the School and College Ability Test (SCAT) and 
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) batteries have merit for predicting academic performance at 
higher educational levels. 
95 
 
Interest inventories 
Young students often talk about their career interests. Comments like the ones given below 
are often heard in colleges and schools. 
 ‘I’ve always been interested in engineering.’ 
 ‘The thought of teaching really turns me off.’ 
 ‘I know I’d enjoy accounting.’ 
 ‘I can’t make up my mind between engineering and medicine.’ 
 ‘I’m really upset because I can’t think of any job I’m interested in.’ 
Exploration of interests is important in career counselling and guidance. Even a simple listing 
in hierarchical order of possible careers may be as valid in some instances as standardized, 
inventoried interests. 
Two of the earlier and more popular inventories still extensively used today are the Kuder 
Preference Record, V ocational (1976) and the Strong Interest Inventory (1994). 
Personality tests 
Personality tests are often fascinating and we find a great range, from the basic  
do-it-yourself personality test in the daily newspaper to sophisticated, projective techniques 
requiring highly specialized psychological training. 
Several of the more popular personality inventories or standardized personality assessment 
instruments are the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, the Edwards Personal Preference Schedule, 
and the Minnesota Multi-phasic Personality Inventory (MMPI).  
The Myers -Briggs Type Indicator is a widely used personality test. The standard Form 
contains 126 items that determine preferences on the four scales of (i) 
extroversion/introversion, (ii) sensing/intuition, (iii) thinking/feeling, and  
(iv) judging/perceiving. The various combinations of these preferences result in sixteen 
personality types, helpful in making career and other decisions. 
The Edwards Personal Preference Schedule (EPPS) is a personality inventory based on the 
theory of personality presented by Henry Murray. The Edwards Personal Preference Schedule 
is designed to show the relative importance to the individual of fifteen key needs or motives: 
Achievement Affiliation Nurturance 
Deference  Intraception Change 
Order  Succorance Endurance 
Exhibition Dominance Heterosexuality 
Autonomy  Abasement Aggression 
 
 
96 
 
Observation  
Observation is a major source of learning. Human beings understand people, events and 
objects by observing. Observations may be classified by the level of sophistication and 
training required.  
 · Level One:  Casual observation. No specific purpose; informal and 
unstructured or unplanned. Requires little or no training. 
 · Level Two: Planned observation for a specific purpose; guided by observation 
instruments such as checklists and rating scales. Some training is desired. 
 · Level Three: Clinical level observation is made under controlled conditions 
and conducted over a long period of time. Sophisticated techniques are used. Observers are 
usually trained at the doctoral level.  
The following guidelines will be helpful in making observations effective: 
 · Observe one client at a time. 
 · Decide the criteria for making observations. 
· Choose an appropriate period and make observations over such a period of 
time. 
· Do not isolate behaviours. Observe the client in the context of the total 
situation. 
 · Integrate the observation data with other data to get a total picture.  
A variety of instruments, such as rating scales and checklists, are available to counsellors for 
observation.  
Rating scales  
In the rating scale method, specific characteristics are identified and observations are 
recorded on a scale, as shown in Figure 3.1. The following is an example of a rating scale: 
 
Fig. 3.1  A Sample Rating Scale 
 
97 
 
The merits of rating scales are:  
 · Helps focus on specific characteristics  
 · Increases the objectivity of the rater  
 · Provides for comparability of observations among observers  
 · Easy to use 
The rating scales are not without limitations: 
 · Improper use: Poor and unclear directions for the scale’s use 
 · Content deficiency: Inadequately defined terms, items that tend to prejudice 
how one responds, overlapping items, excessive length, etc.  
 · Scale problems: Limited scales for rating,  
· Rating problems: Ratings made without sufficient observations or real 
understanding leads to overrating or underrating. Biased rating leads to middle 
rating or distorted rating. 
Checklists 
Another instrument that may be used for recording observations is the observer checklist. 
Figure 3.2 is an example of a simple form of a checklist. 
 
Fig. 3.2 Observation Checklist 
98 
 
Lifestyle analysis  
Adlerian therapy makes use of lifestyle analysis during the first three stages of treatment. It is 
the projective use of early memories, whether they are true or fictional. These memories 
embody a person’s core beliefs and feelings about self and the world. They contain 
reflections of the person’s inferiority feelings, goals and style of life.  
Adlerian client questionnaire  
In addition to these early memories, the therapist uses the following to do the assessment:  
· Description of symptoms, the circumstances under which they began, and the 
client’s description of what he would do if he were not plagued with these 
symptoms;  
· Current and past functioning in the domains of love relationships, family, 
friendships, and school and work;  
 · Family of origin, group and dynamics, and extended family patterns; 
 · Health problems, medication, alcohol, and drug use; and  
 · Previous therapy and attitude toward the therapist.  
Socratic questioning  
The Socratic style places the responsibility for conclusions and decisions in the lap of the 
client. The role of the therapist is that of a ‘co-thinker’, not the role of a superior expert.  
Questioning can take place as indicated below:  
· Awareness of problems: Questions to gather relevant information, clarify 
meaning, and verify feelings. 
· Assessment: More penetrating questions uncover the deeper structures of 
private logic, hidden feelings, and unconscious goals.  
· Choices: New options are generated dialectically, examined, and evaluated to 
help the client take steps in a different direction of her own choosing. 
· Implementation: Questions to evaluate the progress of the client in new 
direction on the new philosophy of life.  
Anecdotal reports 
Anecdotal reports, as the label implies, are descriptions of a client’s behaviour in a given 
situation or event. Such reports are subjective and descriptive in nature and are recorded in a 
narrative form. Often a counsellor will collect several of these reports, which then become an 
anecdotal record of a client’s behaviour over a period of time or situations. 
Figure 3.3 is an example of an anecdotal report. 
99 
 
 
Fig. 3.3 Anecdotal Record: Form A 
Situational observations 
Situational observations are utilized to study the behaviour of individuals in structured 
situations. For example, a group might be given a problem situation but no leader is 
designated. The group is then observed to see how a leader might emerge, who it will be, and 
how different members react. Schoolchildren might be observed in a study situation in which 
the instructor observes the individual for an announced period of time. Workers on the job 
might be observed with and without supervision. 
Behavioural charting 
Another form of recording and reviewing observed behaviour is behavioural charting or 
tallying. In this technique a particular behaviour is observed (e.g., disturbing others, leaves 
work station, laughs without apparent reason) over specific time periods to deter mine how 
frequently it occurs.  
3.3.2 Paraphrasing and Reflecting Feelings 
Empathy is the skill of listening to someone and understanding his feelings. It also helps 
clients understand themselves batter and act accordingly. Table 3.5 shows the skills 
associated with empathy. Empathy involves two major skills: Perceiving and 
Communicating. According to Carl Rogers: ‘To be with another in this way (empathetic) 
means that for the time being you lay aside the views and values you hold for yourself in 
order to enter another’s world without prejudice. In some ways it means you lay aside 
yourself.’ To be empathetic is not an easy task. Here is a short check list to evaluate your 
abilities: 
 · Can I enter the private world of the client and see things as he or she does?  
 · Can I give up my temptation to evaluate and judge my client’s views? 
· Can I extend my understanding of the client’s inner feelings as felt by him, 
without distortion? 
· Can I sense the client’s inner feelings which are dimly seen or 
mixed in confusion? 
Table 3.1 Skills Associated with Empathy 
100 
 
S. No. Skills Explanation 
1 Attending, 
acknowledging        
Showing verbal and non-verbal indications: eye contact, 
smile, sitting upright, etc. 
2 Re-stating, 
paraphrasing 
Repeating what the client has said and building a question or 
a remark on it.  
3 Reflecting Inquiring based on feelings, experiences or content that the 
client has expressed.  
4 Interpreting Offering a tentative interpretation about the other’s feelings, 
desires or meanings. 
5 Summarizing, 
synthesizing 
Synthesizing feelings and experiences to gain focus on what 
to explore further. 
6 Probing Questioning softly and intelligently to secure more 
information, clearing doubts and opening new vistas.  
7 Giving 
feedback 
Sharing information to indicate attention and understanding, 
and encouraging exploration and problems solving.  
8 Supporting  Showing warmth and care to create confidence and affection. 
9 Checking 
perceptions 
Evaluating to establish significance, relevance, accuracy and 
completeness of information for decision—making.  
10 Being quiet Not to push the client. To be a sounding board for the client 
to reflect and think about issues for a while.  
 
 
Source: A modified version of Pickering Marie Sue, ‘Communication’ in Explorations, 
Journal of Research of the University of Maine, V ol. 3, No. 1, Fall, 1986, pp. 16–19. 
Subsuming  
This is more than empathy. The counsellor actually strives to move along those inner 
pathways of the client’s experience for a short period of time to gain understanding. 
3.3.3 Asking Questions  
The autobiography has been one of the most popular forms of literature throughout the ages. 
The autobiography lets a person express what has been important in his or her life, to 
emphasize likes and dislikes, identify values, describe interests and aspirations, acknowledge 
successes and failures, and recall meaningful personal relationships. Such an experience, 
especially for the mature client, can be thought -provoking, insightful, and a stimulus for 
action. On occasion, the experience can also relieve tension. 
Self-expression essays 
Another useful technique that counsellors may want to employ on occasion is the self -
expression essay. This technique seeks to solicit the client’s response, usually in a short, 
written essay form, to a particular question or concern. The objective of this technique is to 
elicit spontaneous, uncensored responses to a topic or topics relevant to the counselling needs 
of the client. Examples of appropriate topics would include these: 
 · My biggest concern is … 
 · I’ll bet you don’t know that … 
101 
 
 · I value … 
 · My future plans are … 
 · My job is … 
It should be emphasized that such documents can elicit positive responses as well as 
descriptions of possible problems or concerns. 
The self-description 
The self-description is another client -participation tool that enables the counsellor to see the 
client through the client’s eyes. The person is requested to ‘paint a picture of yourself in 
words,’ in one page, if desired. 
Such a portrait may share whatever aspects the client wishes to have the reader know. It is 
usually desirable to do this in the early stages of counselling to give the counsellor an 
additional means of getting to know the client. This differs from the self -expression essay 
because the self -description is a person’s view of himself or herself, as indicated in Figure 
3.4; conversely, the self -expression essay may describe an individual’s attitudes towards 
activities, events, and beliefs. 
 
Autobiography of _______________________________________________________ 
When written (date) _____________________________________________________ 
Required assignment ___________________ Other ___________________________ 
Reviewed by (date) _____________________________________________________ 
Purpose ______________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
Significant events  ______________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
Periods or topics omitted _________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
Periods or topics over-emphasized _________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
Possible distortion ______________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
Other comments ________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Fig. 3.3 Autobiographical Review Form 
Self-awareness exercises 
Self-awareness exercises are designed to help people become more aware of their feelings, 
emotions, and values as a step towards more effectively expressing their emotions, feelings, 
and values.  
102 
 
Diaries and daily schedules 
Probably today’s clients are no more willing than their predecessors to share such recordings, 
but when a client willingly maintains and shares diary entries with the counsellor, they can 
provide valuable insights for understanding the client and his or her concerns. Some clients 
will find it easier to present some aspects of their behaviour and experiences in writing than 
in oral communication and, if so, the counsellor may decide to suggest keeping a diary for a 
period of time.  
Another technique for systematically recording the client’s daily activities is the daily 
schedule. This is a simple listing, usually an hour -by-hour account of a client’s daily 
activities. This technique can help the counsellor and client understand how the latter is 
organizing her or his time. Whereas the diary is usually a summary of the day’s activities, 
often with feelings and interpretations, the daily schedule is a more objective presentation of 
the day’s activities.  
Questionnaires 
A questionnaire is an extremely popular non -standardized instrument. Broadly speaking, it 
obviously provides an easy way to collect a great deal of information that may be useful in 
further understanding the client. Also, the questionnaire is a client -participation technique 
that promises opportunities to advance self -understanding, at least under certain 
circumstances, of those completing it. More specifically, questionnaires may be designed in 
such a way as to collect specific types of information related to specific needs of the 
counselling clientele. Questionnaires may also seek information that validates other data 
already available to the counsellor. Additionally, questionnaires can help identify problems of 
individuals or groups, as well as their opinions, attitudes or values. Questionnaires are a good 
way to collect needs assessment data as a basis for establishing programme objectives and 
evaluating data for program improvement. 
Structured interviews 
Another basic and popular technique for increasing a counsellor’s understanding of the client 
is the structured interview. This approach not only provides opportunities for client 
observation under certain controlled conditions, but, equally importantly, enables the 
counsellor to obtain specific information and to explore in -depth behaviour or responses. 
Interviews that are structured are usually planned to serve a particular purpose. Once the 
purpose has been clearly specified, questions are designed that are suitable to achieve the 
goal or purpose of the interview. These questions are usually arranged in some sort of a 
logical sequence, although the interviewer must be flexible so as to alter both the nature and 
sequence of the questions as circumstances suggest. 
3.3.4 Self-Disclosing 
Counsellors choose to share own experiences either to assure or re-energize the clients. When 
sharing experiences or feelings, the counsellor has to ensure that such disclosures are 
purposeful, direct, brief and tailor-made to the client’s situation. 
Self-disclosure, in its broadest sense, refers to a counsellor’s revealing of private information 
to clients, either inside or outside of a counselling session. Counsellor self-disclosure can take 
many different forms, from providing details about one’s own life and experiences to 
103 
 
expressing one’s own thoughts on specific topics and events. Counsellor self -disclosures can 
be classified into four categories: unavoidable, client-initiated, accidental, and deliberate.  
Accidental self-disclosures are encounters that happen by chance (unplanned), spontaneous 
verbal or nonverbal replies that occur during therapy sessions, or other events that happen to 
reveal the therapist’s private information to their client. Client revelations about a 
counsellor’s private life that are unavoidably made are those that result from the counsellor’s 
visible distinguishing features, such as his or her race, gender, attire, jewellery, etc. 
When clients look for information about their counsellor in print or online media, such as 
biographies, resumes, family background, volunteer work, professional accomplishments, 
etc., client initiated disclosures take place. The counsellor-client relationship is often regarded 
to be blurred by the exposure of personal counselling information to clients through 
unavoidable, client-initiated, or inadvertent means, and should be avoided wherever feasible.  
On the other hand, deliberate counsellor self -disclosure is when a counsellor purposefully 
discloses personal information to a client as a tool in the therapy process. Deliberate 
counsellor self-disclosure has been demonstrated to have some significant advantages, but it 
also involves some hazards. 
Benefits  
A variety of observable advantages to the counselling process can result from counsellor self -
disclosure: 
· Building rapport with clients, which is crucial to the therapy process, can be 
accomplished through self -disclosure. In order to foster the trust that is 
necessary for counselling to be effective, counsellors frequently decide to 
share personal information about themselves and their life. 
· Clients could feel uncomfortable sharing their thoughts, feelings, and 
experiences with a complete stranger. This unsettling feeling can be lessened 
by getting to know their counsellor better through the counsellor’s sharing of 
information on a personal level. 
· Clients occasionally believe they are the only ones going through this. Another 
justification for using counsellor self -disclosure is to show clients empathy, 
give them the impression that they are not alone in their challenges, and make 
them feel as though their feelings and experiences are being acknowledged 
and valued. 
· Because the emphasis is entirely on the clients’ presenting concerns, the 
counselling process can frequently feel one-sided to clients. Some clients have 
reported feeling uncomfortable as a result of this imbalance, and in these 
situations, the counsellor’s thoughtful personal sharing can help. 
· The credentials and position of a counsellor may scare clients. The impact of 
this perceived power imbalance on the development of an effective 
counselling relationship may be lessened by the counsellor’s personal 
revelation, which may help to “humanise” the counsellor in the client’s eyes. 
 
104 
 
Risks 
The hazards of counsellor self-disclosure include the following: 
· A change in the treatment’s emphasis away from the client’s demands and 
treatment goals is one of the most important concerns of a counsellor making 
their own disclosures. The client can interpret a counsellor’s excessive 
openness about his or her own personal issues as a symptom of the 
counsellor’s incapacity to carry out their professional obligations responsibly. 
· The client can view a counsellor’s excessive personal disclosure as self -
serving. It could suggest a lack of concern for the client’s problems, which 
could be detrimental to the counselling relationship. 
· If self-disclosure from the counsellor is given without taking into account the 
client’s current issue, it may be harmful. A client who struggles with concern 
or over -caring, for instance, can be prompted to participate (against the 
counsellor) in the precise caretaking behaviour that the counsellor is trying to 
cure if the counsellor reveals his or her struggles. 
· Counsellor self -disclosure can be harmful if it is given without taking the 
client’s value system into account. A client’s trust in the counsellor as a 
suitable source of aid may be threatened if the counsellor expresses personal 
opinions or experiences that go against the client’s values. 
· Oversharing by a counsellor can make the lines between personal and 
professional relationships more ambiguous. The client can start to see the 
counsellor more as a friend than as a trained aid. 
Check Your Progress 
 1. What are the different types of assessment tools?  
 2. Who was the first to design intelligence tests?  
 3. Mention any two risks associated with self-disclosure for counsellors.  
 
3.4 Other skills: Interviewing Skills 
These are other skills as well which are important in counselling. 
3.4.1 Interviewing Skills 
Interview is the  one of the most dependable and reliable  techniques of counselling. In this 
technique, observation is used as the medium with a definite purpose. The interview 
technique helps the counsellor to collect information and to help the client understand himself 
and his problems and to develop an insight into the entire situation. The interviewer 
emphasizes two points: First, face to face interaction and second, the collection of 
information for a definite purpose. In fact, interview method is an integral part of guidance 
process. It is a subjective method.  
105 
 
The term interview is interpreted in accordance with the area in which it is used. In other 
words, we can say that interview is described as conversation with a specific purpose 
between two persons. 
· According to Pauline Young: Interview may be regarded as a systematic 
method by which a person enters the life of a comparative stranger.  
· According to Goode and Hatt: The interview is in a sense, the foundation 
upon which all other elements rest, for it is the data gathering phase. 
· According to Bhigham and Moor: A serious conversation directed to 
definite purpose other than satisfaction in the conversation itself is an 
interview. 
The following elements regarding the meaning of interview are clearly observable by 
studying and analysing the definitions given above:  
 · In interview, there is face to face contact between counsellor and the client.  
 · It is a way to establish contact with one an unknown person.  
 · It is a purposeful conversation.  
· During the procedure of interview the counsellor or interviewer has the pre -
knowledge of the purpose of interview.  
 · Interview is a subjective matter. 
 · Interview is also considered as a focal point of counselling process                                           
Purpose of interview technique 
Interview technique has the following objectives:  
 · To create rapport through conversation.  
 · To obtain knowledge from a person.  
· To help the person in solving his educational, vocational and psychological 
problems and in ensuring adjustment.  
· To diagnose the various causes of the different problems of the person through 
a discussion.  
· To discover those physical and psychological ailments of the person which 
cannot be identified through psychological tests.  
 · To treat the person through psychoanalytical approach.  
Steps of an Interview 
The main steps or the parts of an interview are as follows: 
· Preparation for an interview: The following preparation is done for the 
interview: 
106 
 
  The main aim is to establish rapport with the interviewee because without such 
rapport, mutually fruitful conversation will become difficult. In this process it is essential to 
address the fear and hesitation of the interviewee so that he may express his thoughts and 
emotions freely and may truthfully answer the questions asked. Davis and Robinson have 
given the following suggestions to establish such rapport.  
o To express sympathy towards the interviewee.  
o At the time of interview, the interviewer should assure the interviewee that the 
solution of all his problems is possible because the interviewee comes to the 
interviewer with lots of hope.  
o During interview, the interviewer must accept the suggestions of the interviewee in 
order to encourage him.  
o Before starting interview, the interviewer must make clear his ideas with the help of 
proper examples.  
o About interviewee’s problems, the interviewee must ask some questions, so that the 
interviewee may make available maximum information to the interviewer.   
o During the interview, it is important that in order to provide freedom of conversation 
to the interviewee the interviewer take no immediate decision or react to the 
interviewee’s statements.  
· Body of the interview: The body of the interview is as important as its 
beginning because, in this part of the interview, any aspect of the problem may be 
touched upon and results of the interview depend on this part of the interview. This 
part can be made effective in following ways: 
o Use of motivating questions: At the time of interview the questions to be asked 
should be of motivating nature. The form of questions should be such that to answer 
them interviewee will need to speak more. Those questions should be avoided which 
can be answered in ‘Yes’ or ‘No’.  The interviewer should take much care in the 
selection of questions.  
o Proper use of silence: Use of silence during interview should be made very tactfully. 
o Limited information in a single attempt: During the interview, an attempt is made 
not to collect all the information in a single attempt. In one interview, only some 
limited information should be collected.  
o Understanding the client’s attitude: During the interview, pupils express various 
types of feelings and attitudes while conversing. These effect or influence both 
negative and positive expressions. The counsellor should try to understand and accept 
these expressions of feelings. Various modes of responding to feelings can be adopted, 
such as, yes, good, very good, ok, etc. 
o Control on interview: In the body of interview, client’s freedom should be limited or 
controlled if the freedom is being taken for granted or misused. In such a situation, the 
counsellor loses his control over interview and he fails to gather the desirable 
information.  
107 
 
· Closing of interview: The following two points should be cared while closing 
the interview.  
o Before closing the interview, the client should be satisfied.  
o Before declaring the interview closed, such an arrangement should be made that the 
next interview may be of shorter duration.  
· Follow-up: In this phase, the evaluation of effects of suggestions made after 
the interview in terms of progress made by the client indicates the success of the 
interview. As a result of this evaluation, if desirable effects are not observed, then 
these failures are discussed in the next interview and necessary changes can be made.  
Importance of Interview Method or Technique 
Now, let’s discuss the importance of interview technique from different viewpoints. 
The importance of interview to the teacher are: 
 · It is important for the teacher to solve the problems of the student.   
· Apart from obtaining information it is also useful in getting information about 
attitude, ambitions and other affective matters.  
· The fact -finding interview can be used to explore information needed for 
which previous data are not clear.  
 · It is very easy to use this method.  
 · Reliable information is received during the interview.  
 · Interview technique method develops insight in the client.  
 · Through interview, past events can also be studied.  
 · By interviewing method, a friendly environment can be created.  
 · Using interviewing, many doubts and misunderstandings can be removed.  
· It can be used directly by the teachers in connection with her everyday 
classroom problems. 
 · This technique is indispensable in diagnosis.  
· This technique is useful in studying the more general habits of work of the 
students. 
· This technique usually reveals conditions that the average teacher a would 
never have surmised 
The importance of interview to school workers other than teachers are: 
 · Counsellor’s interview assists students in the choice of subjects.  
 · It is prominent in social case study and in psychiatric work.  
108 
 
· The personal interview becomes the most important single device available in 
the differential diagnosis of mental disorders.  
The importance of interview in the field of studies are: 
· Interview is usually involved in carrying out investigations of the social and 
economic status of the families to which school children belong.  
· Ingenious interviewing helps us to secure essential differences in the thinking 
and procedures of successful and unsuccessful workers.  
· The personal contact with the respondent enables the field workers to delve 
more deeply into the character, living conditions and general life pattern of the 
client. 
Type of Interviews 
Interviews are used for various purposes. They can be classified as following:  
 · According to function:  diagnostic, clinical and research 
 · According to person’s participation: individual and group 
 · According to roles: Non-directive, directive, focused interview, depth, etc. 
Here are some of them discussed in detail. 
· Diagnostic interview: The purpose of this type of interview is to locate the 
possible causes of a pupil or individual’s problems, getting information about his past 
history, home and family relations, environmental situation and personal problems.  
· Clinical interview: Such an interview follows the diagnostic interview. The 
purpose of this interview is to prepare the stage for further interviews.  It is a means of 
establishing an atmosphere of friendliness and is also a step towards mutual 
understanding. 
· Research interview: The purpose of this type of interview is to find facts 
from individual or pupil about a problem, such as for selecting applications for a 
special course.  
· Group interviews : Group interviews are less common. In this case, you 
would be interviewed at the same time as a few other candidates. A panel of 
interviews will ask you questions by turns. The important thing to remember is not to 
interrupt others and the basic conditions set out by the interviewers. The participants 
must always answer honestly and to the best of their capability, and also listen closely. 
There are two types of group interviews: 
o Panel interview: The panel interview is quite common. Normally, two or three pupils 
will sit facing you and ask questions by turns. Sometimes in a panel interview, each 
interviewer will have a different role. One might be asking more challenging 
questions and appearing to be more involved than the other. The interviewer’s purpose 
for this interview is selection and treatment of the pupil. In case of selection and 
treatment purposes, panel interview are recommended methods.  
109 
 
o Directive interview: In such interviews, test results, abilities and achievement of the 
individual are interpreted in terms of his background and final decision about a career 
choice is made by the counsellor himself. 
o Non-directive: It means nothing is explained by the client. The interviewer is only 
there to help to understand the data.  
o Focused: It aims at finding out the response of individuals to specific events.  
o Depth Interview: It is an intensive and research type interview. It emphasizes certain 
psychological and social factors relating to attitudes, emotions, etc.  
Principles for Interviewer 
Blum and Balinsky have suggested the following basic principles or rules for interviewers:  
 · Establish rapport and maintain decorum during the interview.  
 · Give freedom to the student to speak.  
 · Do not discuss anything with the student unnecessarily.  
· When the individual is expressing his point of view, the interviewer should 
behave like an intelligent listener.  
 · The client should not be criticized by the counsellor. 
· During interview, questions should be asked by the counsellor at the proper 
time.  
 · The student should be enabled to understand emotional needs. 
Advantages of Interview Technique 
The following are the advantages of interview technique: 
· Creation of a friendly atmosphere: The counsellor may create a friendly 
atmosphere for obtaining proper responses. He may start a discussion and develop the 
interest of the client before showing the schedule. A right atmosphere is very 
conducive for getting adequate replies.  
· Removal of misunderstanding: The counsellor is personally present to 
remove any doubt or suspicions regarding the nature of enquiry or meaning of any 
question or term used. The answers are, therefore, not biased because of any 
misunderstanding.  
· Possible to secure confidential interview: The pupil may disclose personal 
and confidential information which he would not ordinarily place in writing on paper. 
The pupil may need the situation of personal contact in order to be drawn out.  
· Advantages of clues: The interview enables the counsellor to follow up leads 
and to take advantage of small clues in dealing with complex questions or topics.  
· Permit exchange of ideas: The interview permits an exchange of ideas and 
information. It permits ‘give’ and ‘take’. 
110 
 
· Useful in the case of some categories of children: The interview enables the 
interviewer to deal with children especially those with limited intelligence or in an 
abnormal state of mind.  
· Reliable information: The information gathered through interviews has been 
found to the reliable.  
· Interview technique very close to the counsellor: It is generally accepted 
that interview technique is as close to the counsellor’s work.  
· Possibility of repetition: Sometimes interviews can be held at suitable 
intervals to trace the development of behaviour and attitudes.  
· Useful for several purposes: Interviews can be used for student counselling, 
occupational adjustment, selection of candidates for educational courses etc.  
 · Cross questioning: Interview technique provides scope for cross questioning.  
 · Command of the counsellor: The technique allows the counsellor to remain 
in command of the situation throughout the interview.  
· Better opportunities to know the student: Through the respondent’s 
incidental comments, facial expression, bodily movements and gestures etc, 
counsellor can acquire information that could not be obtained easily by other means.  
· Useful for judging frankness: Cross questioning by the counsellor can enable 
him to judge the sincerity, frankness and insight of the interviewee.  
Limitations of Interview Technique 
The method of interview, despite its numerous advantages mentioned above, has following 
limitations also:  
· Very costly: It is very costly affair. The cost per case is much higher in this 
method. Generally speaking, a questionnaire costs less per unit than the interview 
costs.  
· Biased information: The presence of the counsellor while encouraging the 
respondent to reply, may also introduce a source of bias in the interview. At times the 
opinion of the client is influenced by the counsellor and his replies may not be based 
on what he thinks to be correct but what he thinks the counsellor wants.  
 · Time consuming: It is a time-consuming technique. 
 · Expertness required: It requires a high level of expertise. Among the 
important qualities to be possessed by counsellor are objectivity, insight and 
sensitivity. These qualities are not possessed by an ordinary counsellor in an adequate 
amount.  
· Subjectivity: The interview is a subjective method of collecting data which 
may be influenced by biases and prejudices of the counsellor to a great extent.  
 
111 
 
Suggestions for a Successful Interview 
Certain suggestions have been given for the success of any interview. However, one must 
remember that ultimately, the success of an interview depends upon the skill of the 
interviewer. Darley has listed the following points that should be taken care of essentially: 
· The interviewer should neither make very lengthy speeches nor should he try 
to suppress the client.  
· The interviewer should explore, first, what are the client’s aspirations that is,  
what he/she wants. Interviewer should suggest remedies after identifying that 
aspiration.  
· The interviewer should get himself introduced with client’s feelings and his 
attitudes in the beginning so that no problem may arise during the interview.  
· The interviewer should use easy language. He should provide only the most 
important information to the client because as a result of excessive conversation with 
the client, he will find himself too involved with the client’s problems and helpless in 
taking any decision.  
Bingham has also given the following suggestions for a successful interview:  
 · Suggestions for preparation for interview: The suggestions are: 
o The main objective of the interview should be decided before starting a successful 
interview. The interviewer should prepare a list of information nuggets or facts to be 
obtained beforehand.  
o There should be no favouritism during the interview i.e., the interview should be 
impartial.  
o The schedule for interview should be fixed by both the interviewer as well as the 
client. The time decided should be convenient to both.  
o The interviewer should collect the information regarding the client. For this purpose, 
the interviewer can prepare the cumulative record card.  
o To obey the principle of confidentially for the interview is must. Only after being 
assured of confidentiality, the client would be able to supply correct and clear 
information.  
· Suggestions for interviewing:  After making the preparation of interview 
successfully and effectively, the following suggestions can be used for effective 
interviewing: 
o The interview should not be rushed. 
o It is essential for the interviewer to have complete control on the interview. During 
interview, the interviewer should go on telling the objective of the interview to the 
client.  
o The interviewer should win the confidence of the client. For this, the interviewer 
should go on exhibiting his interest and confidence in the client.  
112 
 
o The interview should be skilled in making friends.  
o The interviewer should listen the client with attention and patience.  
o The client and the interviewer should cooperate with each other and the interviewer 
should have sympathetic feelings towards the client.  
o During interview, the interviewer should look after each and every comfort of the 
client.  
Qualities required for a successful interview 
For the success of an interview, an interviewer must have the following qualities:  
· Humorous: The interview situation is generally tense for a client. The 
interviewer should be humorous in order to eliminate this tension.  
· Tolerance for attitudes and feelings: A successful and effective interviewer 
is that who establishes a very close contact with the client. This he can do by 
accepting the client’s attitudes and feelings. In this way the client can remove his 
doubts. The interviewer should not give his verdict regarding the client’s attitudes and 
feelings.  
· Gathering limited information: A successful and effective interviewer is that 
who believes in collecting limited and pre -fixed information. If it is not done, then 
unnecessary information is gathered which proves meaningless.  
· Frank speaker: A successful interviewer is that who talks frankly with the 
client. Indirect and cursory conversation cannot be advantageous and can create 
doubts in the minds of the client.  
· No dominance upon conversation: During the interview, the interviewer 
should not go on speaking all the time. The client should be given ample time to 
speak. During such a conversation, if the client is speaking, he should not be 
interrupted by the interviewer. 
3.4.2 Listening Skills in Counselling 
We have already discussed the significance of these skills at length in previous Units. 
To reiterate it again, listening is a fundamental counselling skill. It is the skill of getting the 
data you require from a speaker while getting them to open up and discuss their problems. 
Your goal is to speak as little as possible and refrain from raising too many inquiries. You 
shouldn’t provide your personal viewpoint on the speaker’s situation as the listener 
(especially when counselling). You must stay impartial and limit your suggestions to those 
that are pertinent to the speaker’s problems. Since our natural impulse as humans, especially 
in our culture, is to fill the silence, learning this ability can be rather challenging. 
Dimensions of Listening Skills  
The fine art of listening has a broad scope, usually including the intention, presence, focus, 
curiosity and observations. It is a self -awareness thing, bringing into play a complex mix of 
small decisions to help in listening generously. What to listen for and when to intervene are 
also vital aspects of listening well. 
113 
 
First Dimension: Token Listening 
The First Dimension isn’t actually paying attention, it is token listening. One is not really 
concentrating. One is side -tracked by a conversation taking place elsewhere or are thinking 
about something completely different. One could even be daydreaming or listening to own 
thoughts. All of these situations involve the person is not paying attention to the other person.  
Second Dimension: To Make a Point 
In the second dimension, one is listening to the conversation but for a different reason. One is 
paying attention to when there is a chance to ask a question, make a comment, or express an 
opinion in the conversation. In real, one is simply paying attention to insert or interrupt. 
There is frequently a busy element and a sense of urgency. When the discussion is becoming 
top topic, one may want to be sure in order to get a chance to speak. When both sides are in 
this mindset, the talk quickly becomes heated and nobody can be heard. 
Third Dimension: Semi or Partial Listening 
When one is only partially hearing in the third dimension. It’s possible that one hears what 
someone is saying and believe that he/she understands them, but the emotions and ideas are 
getting in the way. One lacks the internal listening space necessary to pick up on tiny cues, 
such as the true message the other person is attempting to convey, their worries over what has 
just occurred, or what they are requesting of the person. 
Fourth Dimension: Active or Participatory Listening 
Active listening in another dimension that helps the person to cross the threshold into more 
expansive and tightly focused hearing. One pays far more attention and genuinely put 
themselves in the other person’s shoes emotionally. One is paying attention to what they are 
saying and maintaining eye contact. Finally, one is correctly contributing to the debate and 
are not interjecting. The speech volume, tempo, and tone often mimic the other person’s like 
a mirror. One is actively participating in their inner life and are extremely present. 
Fifth Dimension: Full- fledged Listening 
The last dimension is wide and has several layers of listening. It covers every aspect of level 
four listening and much more. It has a curious quality and has a non -judgmental aspect as 
well. Active listening in dimension four helps one to cross the threshold into more expansive 
and tightly focused hearing. One pays far more attention and genuinely put yourself in the 
other person’s shoes emotionally. One is paying attention to what they are saying and 
maintaining eye contact. Finally, one have correctly contributing to the debate and are not 
interjecting. The speech volume, tempo, and tone often mimic the other person’s like a 
mirror. One is actively participating in their inner life and are extremely present. 
This type of listening looks for patterns, themes, and metaphors throughout the whole 
spectrum of the topic being addressed, including broader concerns and systemic components. 
It measures the energy levels as the tales go and has a true feel of the session’s overarching 
storyline. It captures solitude and stillness well. 
In addition to hearing what is being said, listening in the fifth dimension frequently picks up 
on what is not being stated. It entails paying attention in a way that keeps the details in mind 
114 
 
while being receptive. As one may imagine, it feels wonderful to be truly heard and the centre 
of someone’s attention. 
The fifth dimension also entails listening to self, using the intuition and self -awareness, but 
keeping them in the background and reserving them for when the time is just perfect to share 
them—or not. 
3.4.3 Monitoring Skills in Counselling 
We have discussed the monitoring in the context of counsellors. Here, we will discuss it in 
the context of clients. Cognitive behavioural therapists almost always instruct their patients in 
the monitoring strategy. Clients are requested to methodically observe and record particular 
targets, such as their own thoughts, emotions, bodily sensations, and behaviours, as part of 
this type of data collection. For instance, a client who is depressed might be asked to record 
information about situations when their mood felt especially low, a client with post -traumatic 
stress disorder might be asked to complete a diary to record details of their trauma flashbacks, 
and a client in recovery from an addiction issue might be asked to record information about 
what they were doing and thinking just before using substances. Helping people understand 
how their actions and thoughts affect how they feel is one of the goals of CBT. 
Clients may gain a greater understanding of the connections among circumstances, thoughts, 
emotions, bodily sensations, and their responses through the practise of self -monitoring. By 
recording the frequency and intensity of intrusive thoughts throughout therapy, for example, 
self-monitoring can be a quick and easy way to evaluate client development and determine 
whether they are ready for other treatment intervention phases (For e.g., the introduction of 
cognitive restructuring or behavioural experiments). Although the concept of self -monitoring 
is very straightforward, it is frequently difficult for clients to carry out efficiently (Korotitsch 
& Nelson-Gray, 1999). 
Clients are requested to methodically watch and record particular targets, including  thoughts, 
physical sensations, emotions, and actions, as part of a self -monitoring technique. It serves as 
both an assessment tool and an intervention (Korotitsch & Nelson -Gray, 1999; Proudfoot & 
Nicholas, 2010), and it is a component of a larger practise of empirical research and 
measurement that is essential to CBT (Persons, 2008). Self -monitoring consists of two 
components: recording and discrimination (Korotitsch & Nelson -Gray, 1999). The client 
learns how to bring awareness to target phenomena during discrimination by recognising 
them and observing when they happen. Increasing clients’ awareness of their symptoms and 
behaviour is a crucial part of CBT, but for many clients, drawing attention to and raising 
awareness of particular thoughts, sensations, or emotions will be unfamiliar and challenging. 
The act of recording involves writing down events (usually through a written record). 
Discrimination becomes an explicit, deliberate process that may be examined and studied 
when it is documented. The client’s comprehension of their symptoms, as well as the order 
and method by which they occur, will be improved via the inclusion of more description or 
context in the documentation of individual events. Both recording and discrimination are 
abilities that must be developed. In order to effectively complete self -monitoring records, 
clients are likely to need assistance and training. Self -monitoring promotes clients’ 
engagement and motivation by encouraging a sense of self -control and autonomy. It is an 
easy method to introduce clients to the idea of active participation in therapy. 
115 
 
3.4.4 Training Clients in Relaxation 
Low tension in the body and mind is a sign of relaxation. Relaxation techniques are unique 
procedures that people usually apply to unwind. A state of physical stiffness in the body 
known as tension can result in pain as well as emotional responses like anxiety. In order to 
release this tension and gradually relax the muscles and muscle groups, physical relaxation is 
used. When the mind is largely free of tension and distraction, psychological relaxation takes 
place. When a person is mentally calm, they may still have stress in their lives or duties to 
perform, but stress and tension are not at the top of their minds. People who are under stress 
frequently experience physical aches and pains as well as muscle tightness. Psychological 
relaxation can impact physical relaxation. Relaxation comes more naturally to some people 
than others. Anxious people might experience fewer states of relaxation than other people. A 
person’s level of relaxation may be impacted by depression, anxiety, external stressors 
including unemployment, food, and drug usage. 
There are many different relaxation methods, and some people ask therapists for advice on 
how to unwind.  
· Aromatherapy: It uses pure essential oils and organic smells to soothe the mind and 
alleviate stress, is one of the most popular relaxation therapies.  
· Breathing: When someone is feeling anxiety, tension, or panic, relaxation techniques 
that emphasise slow, deep breathing, also known as diaphragmatic breathing, can help them 
relax. Even when practised on its own, diaphragmatic breathing has been demonstrated to 
significantly lower a person’s cortisol (the stress hormone) levels and soothe powerful 
responses to stress in the present. 
· Exercise: Numerous studies have demonstrated the ability of physical activity, such 
as yoga, running, and a number of other exercise methods, to reduce stress and anxiety. Even 
brief daily walks can aid in relaxation. 
· Herbal treatments: Some people take herbal supplements to help them relax and feel 
less anxious. While some specialists contend that the reported calmness brought on by herbal 
medicines may simply be the result of the placebo effect, others discover that taking specific 
supplements actually works. 
· Individual meditation: There are many different styles and methods of meditation, 
but they all entail employing a calm, relaxed environment and concentration to calm the body 
and mind. Numerous research have indicated that mindfulness meditation, in particular, may 
help reduce the symptoms of anxiety. 
· Massage: There are numerous massage types. Massage therapy frequently focuses on 
physically assisting clients in reducing a variety of muscle tension, including tension brought 
on by stress or worry. 
· Medication: One element of mental health treatment for an anxiety problem may 
include anti-anxiety medications. When taken as prescribed, medicine may aid in relaxation 
and tension alleviation for certain people. 
116 
 
· Music: To achieve a sense of serenity, ease tension, or as a means of soothing sadness 
or anxiety, some people listen to music they find calming. It has been demonstrated that 
music can lower stress by affecting the autonomic nervous system. 
· Progressive muscle relaxation: To relieve muscle tension that can develop as a result 
of stress or worry, progressive muscle relaxation is frequently employed. One area of the 
body at a time is tensed and relaxed throughout this workout. 
· Guided imagery: The client is instructed to picture herself/himself in a setting or 
circumstance that brings back fond memories. The client enters a state of relaxation thanks to 
the pleasant imagery. The physiological changes that take place when the client is relaxed are 
the opposite of those brought on by anxiety. 
Body stress is frequently brought on by problems with one’s mental health. However, 
stressors that happen over the course of a person’s life, such as taking a test or evaluation, 
giving a job interview, or taking care of children, can also cause tension. It may be helpful to 
select some relaxation techniques that are effective for you and put them into constant 
practice when tension develops as a result of a mental health issue or stressor.  
In behaviour therapy, relaxation techniques are frequently employed to ease tension, anxiety, 
and stress. In this modest form of ecstasy, the frontal lobe of the brain’s backward cortex 
communicates with the frontal cortex by way of a slight sedative. Research has shown it to be 
effective in a variety of disorders and conditions: 
· Primarily those related to anxiety, fear, and stress e.g., specific phobias;  
· Those in the realm of behavioural medicine and dentistry, such as acute and chronic 
pain (e.g., tension headaches); 
· Hypertension and coping with nausea related to chemotherapy. 
In the relaxation state, muscle tension starts to loosen and the heartbeat and respiratory rate 
start to return to normal.  
When should relaxation skills be used? 
Following a discussion of the stress and relaxation reactions, your client should understand 
how these ideas relate to their circumstance: 
· Do they feel angry, worried, stressed, or afraid?  
· What signs do they exhibit when these feelings occur? 
As a counsellor, you might discover that they struggle to remember to apply their relaxation 
techniques until it’s too late if they lack the capacity to identify triggers and warning 
indications. A review of triggers and warning indicators easily leads to a discussion of the 
situations in which relaxation techniques should be applied.  
· Does your client have anxiety before school in the mornings or perhaps just before 
presenting a presentation at work?  
· Do they experience consistent stress throughout the day?  
117 
 
Not only will this discussion be beneficial your client learn when to use their skills, it will 
help you determine what skills are a good fit. 
3.4.5 Improving Client’s Self-Talk and Self-Perception 
Self-talk refers to your inner voice or the way you speak to yourself. You almost probably 
talk to yourself even if you’re not aware of it. This inner voice creates an internal monologue 
throughout the day by fusing conscious thoughts with ingrained views and biases. Positive, 
negative, and instructional self -talk are the three main categories. ’I am really glad for 
myself,’ ’I am doing well,’ or ’That’s not great, but it might be worse’ are a few examples of 
self-talk. 
In actuality, you naturally chat to yourself during the course of a day. Positive self-talk is also 
becoming more widely recognised as a potent method for boosting self -esteem and 
controlling negative emotions. Individuals with mastery over positive self -talk are thought to 
be more confident, motivated, and equally productive. A person’s perception of who they are, 
or of any of the mental or physical characteristics that make them up, is referred to as self -
perception. Disorders like anxiety disorder, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, etc. can 
be overcome with the aid of behaviour therapy. The core tenet of behaviour therapy is that 
you can modify your feelings by changing the way you think. 
Steps to improve self-talk and self-perception 
The steps are: 
· Fully acknowledging that we are largely responsible for creating our own 
emotional problems;  
· Accepting the notion that we have the ability to change these disturbances 
significantly;  
· Then recognizing that our emotional problems largely stem from irrational 
beliefs;  
 · Clearly perceiving these beliefs;  
 · Also seeing the value of disputing such self-defeating beliefs;  
· Moreover, accepting the fact that if we expect to change we had better work 
hard in emotive and behavioural ways to counteract our beliefs and the 
dysfunctional feelings and actions that follow;  
· Understanding what the rational alternative to these irrational beliefs are; and  
· In addition practicing REBT methods of uprooting or changing disturbed 
consequences and practicing their healthy alternatives for the rest of our life (Ellis, 1999, 
2001b, 2002). 
The mental story you tell yourself defines self -talk. It’s your inner voice, and you might or 
might not have given it any thought or attention. Truth be told, we often underestimate the 
power of our internal dialogue on how we perceive ourselves and the world. Self -talk is 
typically understood to be a combination of our conscious and unconscious prejudices and 
ideas about who we are and the world at large. The notion that we have both conscious and 
118 
 
unconscious levels of cognition, with unconscious cognitive processes influencing our 
behaviour in ways we are unaware of, was initially put forth by Sigmund Freud (Cherry, 
2019). Self -talk can be positive or negative and paying attention to which you most often 
sway towards, can help you start making proactive changes about how you take on life’s 
challenges. 
Negative Self-Talk 
We focus on preconceived notions that we’re ‘not good enough’ or ‘always a failure’ or ‘can’t 
do anything correctly’ in our self -talk patterns, which are all too frequently negative. We 
remember the times we didn’t quite get it right more often than the times we do because our 
brains are programmed to retain negative experiences over happy ones.  
Positive Self-Talk 
As you might have suspected, positive self -talk is the opposite of negative self -talk. It’s not 
about being narcissistic or tricking our minds into making false assumptions. It’s more 
important to have compassion for oneself and to comprehend who you are and what you’ve 
been through (Jantz, 2019). Positive self -talk sees our internal narrative switching to ideas 
like ‘I can do better next time’ or ‘I choose to learn from my mistakes, and not be held back 
by them’. 
As the research suggests, positive self -talk is important for a number of reasons. From 
helping to overcome body dysmorphia to sports performance, mediating anxiety and 
depression, to more effective learning, positive self -talk can make a world of difference. 
Three additional benefits include: 
· Helps to reduce stress:  According to research, those who are more predisposed to 
think optimistically also tend to engage in positive self -talk and more active coping 
mechanisms when confronted with stressful conditions and problems (Iwanaga, Yokoyama, 
and Seiwa, 2004).With the knowledge that you will handle issues with the best of your ability 
and that, regardless of the outcome, you did the best you could, positive self -talk helps you 
reframe the way you view stressful situations. Approaching these issues with an optimistic ’I 
can accomplish this’ attitude rather than a pessimistic ’This is too hard’ attitude offers up new 
perspectives and approaches to problem-solving. 
· Helps to boost confidence and resilience: Your self-confidence may be increased by 
approaching life with positive self -talk. People with high optimism and self -esteem are more 
likely to achieve their goals, perform well in school, and recover from surgery (Lyubormisky, 
2008). The confidence that the things you want are achievable and the ability to discover 
solutions to issues when they do emerge are two things that regular positive self -talk can help 
you to establish. 
· Helps build better relationships:  You undoubtedly know how it feels to be around 
someone who is upbeat, confident, and satisfied with who they are as a person. They radiate 
confidence, which has a favourable impact on others around them. According to Assad, 
Donnellan, and Conger (2012), couples that expressed more optimism reported better levels 
of cooperation and favourable results. Positive self -talkers are also exceptionally good at 
noticing the good qualities in individuals around them. 
119 
 
To start using positive self -talk, you must first determine how frequently and what kind of 
negative thinking and self -talk you engage in. Once you are aware of this, you can begin to 
train your thinking. Negative self-talk tends to fall into one of four categories: 
· Personalizing: Meaning you blame yourself when things go wrong. 
· Polarizing: Meaning you see things only as good or bad, no gray areas or room for 
middle ground. 
· Magnifying: Meaning you only focus on the bad or negative in every scenario and 
dismiss anything good or positive. 
· Catastrophizing: Meaning you always expect the worst. 
You may identify with a few or all of these categories. The idea is that once you begin 
classifying your thoughts in this way, you can start working on replacing negative frames 
with more constructive ones. You must put in the practise to fully focus on your inner 
dialogue and pinpoint the areas where adjustments are required because this won’t happen 
overnight. 
 
Check Your Progress 
 4. Define interview according to Goode and Hatt.  
 5. Mention any two qualities needed for a successful interview.  
 6. List any two categories of negative self-talk.  
 
3.5 Terminating Helping 
We have already discuss the termination of counselling process in detail as part of stages of 
counselling. Here, we will discuss it again in terms of the effects it has on the client.  
All that is good must come to an end. The counselling process is one that is deep and requires 
personal investment. If it has gone well, then there will be significant personal growth and the 
next step will come easily. If there is something occurring that is impeding personal growth, 
then the next step will be difficult. But regardless of the good or the bad, the end is inevitable. 
In the end, the counsellor has made client enable to think, feel and behave in the way he/she 
desires and to be empowered without the counsellor’s support. With termination, there may 
be some safety features put into place. Many counsellors feel the need to check in with their 
clients after some time or have their clients check in with them. This is commonly referred to 
as a follow up and involves communicating with the client to ensure stability and well -being. 
It’s no different than a doctor’s office calling in and checking up on you. 
Termination is considered not only at the end of a successful relationship, but also when it 
seems counselling is not being helpful. In successful cases, the relationship between 
counsellor and client continues. However, it should not result in the client’s dependence on 
the counsellor for every simple problem that arises during the course of implementation of a 
plan. Therefore, termination is important as a means of empowering the client by creating a 
temporary closure of relationships.  
120 
 
Plan to end  
Preparation for termination should begin long before the actual date of closing the discussion. 
A sense of independence and desire for individual action is to be created during the last stage 
of counselling. Before closing the session, the key points should be summarized and 
validated by getting acceptance from the client. The client should be invited to review the 
plan of action and say in his or her words, what he or she is going to do and what is expected 
of the counsellor.  
In fact, managed care requires the counsellor to play a key role in assisting the client in 
reviewing progress and chalking out necessary steps to ensure right developments. The 
counsellor may offer help by announcing an open door policy or by indicating interventions 
in the plan. The role of counsellor is critical in providing the employee with resources and 
time and periodically assessing the plan. Before terminating, in consultation with the client, 
the counsellor has to identify a date (or dates) in advance, for reviewing the progress and 
evolving corrective measures.  
At the end of counselling, the client may have varied emotions. Some may feel anxious about 
the new behaviour, some may fear criticism, some may feel sad and some others may have 
anger. Each of the emotion has a root cause behind it and the counsellor should understand it 
to remain ‘in-charge’ of the situation.  
3.5.1 Resistance to Termination 
Patients normally feel anger towards the counsellor, when nearing the end of their 
counselling relationship, perceiving it as abandonment. It is more likely to occur if a 
counsellor does not prepare them beforehand. Patients might feel anxious about having to 
handle things without the counsellor’s support. This thought can be very scary as they have 
become dependent on their relationship with the counsellor for support. Other reactions from 
the patients can be sadness on losing a relationship. The emotions that are most often easier 
and comfortable to express are anger or separation anxiety. Unsettled issues surrounding the 
past relationships can play out while terminating the counsellor -client relationship. However, 
if the process is handled ethically and honestly, the counsellor is in a great position to endow 
the patient with an end which is healthy, resulting in a productive relationship that they look 
back at positively and feel content with the end. 
Counsellors, themselves, can also have some bad experiences when forced -termination 
occurs and they feel emotionally overwhelmed. Guilt is also a fairly common emotion for 
counsellors on initiating the termination. If and when the goals which were set at the 
beginning are met, termination ensues. Also when the counsellor feels that the problem has 
been resolved, he may raise the subject of termination directly, if the patient feels they have 
fully recovered they might bring up the idea. In the latter case, if the counsellor agrees with 
the patient, termination can take place. However, the counsellor must also be attentive to the 
likelihood that effort to termination may have aroused due to lack of progress or it could a 
sign of conflict and resistance and should be handled carefully. If ending of the relationship is 
reasonable, the counsellor should use the last few meetings to make the patients comfortable. 
Post-termination, the patients often feel that their symptoms —grieving, sadness, anxiety, or 
separation—have renewed. When a counsellor successfully manages these symptoms, the 
counselee gets the most benefit of the counselling.  
121 
 
 
 
Forced-termination, by its very nature, means that the counselling relationship is ending too 
suddenly and prematurely. After allocating so much time supporting your patient and gaining 
their trust, making them feel open and honest, terminating the relationship abruptly can be 
harmful. This can leave counsellors feeling as though they are abandoning their patient, and 
feeling responsible for whatever might happen to the patient as a result of the end of the 
relationship. For many counsellors, a sense of annoyance feeling exists of not having ‘done 
the job’ or achieved what they set out to achieve for the patient. Counsellors who are under 
training often have a problem with a sense of omnipotence; they feel that they are the ones 
who can really help the patient. On the other hand, it is typical to feel impotent, or to get the 
feeling that the association was not at all obliging to the patient and that the patient will be  
better off with a different counsellor. When working with a patient for merely a short period, 
it can be tricky to see if any progress was made, especially if the patient is not letting the 
counsellor know about any improvements. In such cases, it is of paramount importance for 
counsellors to work to come at ease with that feeling of ‘not knowing’. It could be some time 
before a patient themselves realizes the value of counsellor’s help. Counsellors may feel a 
sense of failure and sadness for not being able to see their patients any longer, and other may 
feel a sense of respite. This relief often leads to culpability about being glad to move on from 
the therapy situation. It is very important to acknowledge your own feelings as you proceed 
through the end of counselling. 
 
Check Your Progress 
 7. What kind of safety features can be used with termination?  
 8. What is the effect of forced termination on counsellors? 
 
3.6 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions 
1. Assessment tools can be categorized into two sets: 
a. Standardized testing tools:  Intelligence tests, aptitude tests, interest inventories and 
personality tests. 
b. Non-standardized testing tools:  Observation, Socratic questionnaires, Alderian 
questionnaire, lifestyle analysis. 
2. The first intelligence tests were designed by the Frenchman Alfred Binet to be 
administered to individual students. 
3. The risks associated with self-disclosure for counsellors are:  
a. Counsellor self -disclosure can be harmful if it is given without taking the client’s 
value system into account. A client’s trust in the counsellor as a suitable source of aid 
may be threatened if the counsellor expresses personal opinions or experiences that go 
against the client’s values. 
122 
 
b. Oversharing by a counsellor can make the lines between personal and professional 
relationships more ambiguous. The client can start to see the counsellor more as a 
friend than as a trained aid. 
4. According to Goode and Hatt, an interview is in a sense, the foundation upon which 
all other elements rest, for it is the data gathering phase. 
5. For a successful interview, an interviewer must have the following qualities: 
a. Gathering limited information: A successful and effective interviewer is that who 
believes in collecting limited and pre -fixed information. If it is not done, then 
unnecessary information is gathered which proves meaningless.  
b. Frank speaker:  A successful interviewer is that who talks frankly with the client. 
Indirect and cursory conversation cannot be advantageous and can create doubts in the 
minds of the client. 
6. Negative self-talk tends to fall into following categories: 
a. Personalizing: Meaning you blame yourself when things go wrong. 
b. Polarizing: Meaning you see things only as good or bad, no gray areas or room for 
middle ground. 
7. With termination, there may be some safety features put into place. Many counsellors 
feel the need to check in with their clients after some time or have their clients check in with 
them. This is commonly referred to as a  follow up  and involves communicating with the 
client to ensure stability and well-being. 
8. Forced-termination, by its very nature, means that the counselling relationship is 
ending too suddenly and prematurely. After allocating so much time supporting your patient 
and gaining their trust, making them feel open and honest, terminating the relationship 
abruptly can be harmful. This can leave counsellors feeling as though they are abandoning 
their patient, and feeling responsible for whatever might happen to the patient as a result of 
the end of the relationship. 
3.7 Summary 
• Assessment is a means of increasing understanding of the uniqueness of an individual 
in terms of traits, emotions and behaviour. 
• Intelligence testing procedures have matured with successive developments in design 
and procedures. 
• Aptitude may be defined as a trait that indicates an individual’s ability to perform or 
learn in a given area. Aptitude tests assist a person in making educational and career 
decisions. 
• Personality tests are often fascinating and we find a great range, from the basic do -it-
yourself personality test in the daily newspaper to sophisticated, projective techniques 
requiring highly specialized psychological training. 
123 
 
• Observation is a major source of learning. Human beings understand people, events 
and objects by observing. Observations may be classified by the level of 
sophistication and training required. 
• Adlerian therapy makes use of lifestyle analysis during the first three stages of 
treatment. It is the projective use of early memories, whether they are true or fictional. 
• Anecdotal reports, as the label implies, are descriptions of a client’s behaviour in a 
given situation or event. Such reports are subjective and descriptive in nature and are 
recorded in a narrative form. 
• Interview is the one of the most dependable and reliable techniques of counselling. In 
this technique, observation is used as the medium with a definite purpose. 
• At the time of interview the questions to be asked should be of motivating nature. The 
form of questions should be such that to answer them interviewee will need to speak 
more. 
• Group interviews are less common. In this case, you would be interviewed at the same 
time as a few other candidates. 
• The counsellor is personally present to remove any doubt or suspicions regarding the 
nature of enquiry or meaning of any question or term used. 
• Clients may gain a greater understanding of the connections among circumstances, 
thoughts, emotions, bodily sensations, and their responses through the practise of self -
monitoring. 
• The act of recording involves writing down events (usually through a written record). 
Discrimination becomes an explicit, deliberate process that may be examined and 
studied when it is documented. 
• Psychological relaxation can impact physical relaxation. Relaxation comes more 
naturally to some people than others. Anxious people might experience fewer states of 
relaxation than other people. 
• Self-talk refers to your inner voice or the way you speak to yourself. You almost 
probably talk to yourself even if you’re not aware of it. This inner voice creates an 
internal monologue throughout the day by fusing conscious thoughts with ingrained 
views and biases. 
• As the research suggests, positive self-talk is important for a number of reasons. From 
helping to overcome body dysmorphia to sports performance, mediating anxiety and 
depression, to more effective learning, positive self -talk can make a world of 
difference. 
• Termination is considered not only at the end of a successful relationship, but also 
when it seems counselling is not being helpful. In successful cases, the relationship 
between counsellor and client continues. 
124 
 
• At the end of counselling, the client may have varied emotions. Some may feel 
anxious about the new behaviour, some may fear criticism, some may feel sad and 
some others may have anger. 
• Patients normally feel anger towards the counsellor, when nearing the end of their 
counselling relationship, perceiving it as abandonment. It is more likely to occur if a 
counsellor does not prepare them beforehand. 
• After allocating so much time supporting your patient and gaining their trust, making 
them feel open and honest, terminating the relationship abruptly can be harmful.  
3.8 Key Words 
CBT: Cognitive behavioural therapy  (CBT) is a talking therapy that can help you manage 
your problems by changing the way you think and behave. It’s most commonly used to treat 
anxiety and depression, but can be useful for other mental and physical health problems. 
Body Dysmorphia: Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), or body dysmorphia, is  a mental 
health condition where a person spends a lot of time worrying about flaws in their 
appearance. These flaws are often unnoticeable to others.  
3.9 Self-Assessment Questions and Exercises 
Short-Answer Questions 
1. In what ways can asking questions and self -disclosing be employed by 
counsellors?  
 2. Write a short note on monitoring skills in counselling. 
 3. What is the significance of self-talk? 
Long-Answer Questions 
 1. Explain the different assessment tools used for problem-solving. 
 2. Describe the significance and process of interviewing in counselling. 
 3. Discuss the significance of training clients in relaxation. 
3.10 Further Readings 
Corey, G. 2016. Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy . United 
States: Cengage Learning. 
Boivin, M. and A. Meier. 2010. Counselling and Therapy Techniques: Theory and Practice . 
United Kingdom: SAGE Publications. 
Tinsley, Howard E. A.; Noelle S. Giffin Wiersma; and Suzanne H. Lease (Ed.). 2015. 
Contemporary Theory and Practice in Counseling and Psychotherapy . United States:  SAGE 
Publications. 
Reeves, A. 2012. An Introduction to Counselling and Psychotherapy: From Theory to 
Practice. United Kingdom: SAGE Publications. 
125 
 
UNIT 4  MODELS OF COUNSELLING SKILLS 
Structure  
 4.0 Objectives 
 4.1 Introduction 
 4.2 Nature and Importance of Counselling Skills and Working Alliance 
  4.2.1 Social Skills 
  4.2.2 Learning Skills 
  4.2.3 Communication Skills 
  4.2.4 Probing Skills  
  4.2.5 Problem-Solving Skills 
  4.2.6 Negotiating Skills 
 4.3 Models of Counselling 
  4.3.1 Rogers Model of Counselling Skills 
  4.3.2 Carkhuff Model of Counselling Skills, 
  4.3.3 IPR Model of Counselling Training 
  4.3.4 Integrative and Eclectic Counselling 
 4.4 Indian Models of Counselling 
  4.4.1 Role of Detachment in Indian Counselling  
  4.4.2 Role of Self-Surrender in Indian Counselling  
 4.5 Modern Trends in Counselling 
  4.5.1 Directive Counselling 
  4.5.2 Non-Directive Counselling 
  4.5.3 Eclectic Counselling 
  4.5.4 Future of Counselling 
 4.6 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions 
 4.7 Summary 
 4.8 Key Words 
 4.9 Self Assessment Questions and Exercises 
 4.10 Further Readings 
 
126 
 
4.0 Objectives 
After going through this unit, you will be able to:  
 · Discuss the nature and importance of counselling skills and working alliance  
 · Explain the various models of counselling 
 · Describe the modern trends in counselling 
 
4.1 Introduction 
There are hundreds of clinical counselling methods to select from, and professional 
counsellors use a range of therapeutic approaches in their work. Over 300 different models  of 
counselling practice are listed in the most recent edition of The SAGE Encyclopaedia of 
Theory in Counselling and Psychotherapy. It is initially important to comprehend that there is 
no one counselling strategy that is superior to the others. This is due to the fact that 
counselling techniques are founded more on ideas of human behaviour and change than on 
concrete data. Because there are so many factors to take into account during the counselling 
process, it can be challenging to say whether one counselling style is more effective than 
another. Due to variations in client histories and situations, counsellor communication styles, 
and even client and counsellor moods on the day of the comparison, there may be significant 
variations in the therapy outcome. It is difficult to experimentally account for such 
disparities, making it nearly impossible to establish the superiority of any particular 
counselling strategy. Without such evidence, it falls to counsellors to make every effort to 
ensure that the treatment model(s) they use are the most effective for meeting the needs of 
each client. Acquainting oneself with the models that have proven to be most helpful in actual 
practice is the first step in fulfilling that responsibility. In this unit, we will discuss the nature 
and importance of counselling skills and working alliance, along with some of the models of 
counselling. It will also focus on the modern trends in counselling. 
4.2 Nature and Importance of Counselling Skills and Working Alliance 
To be successful, a counsellor has to be skilful in his approach to counselling. We will now 
discuss the important skills essential for any counsellor. We have already discussed some of 
these skills. Here we will again discuss their importance for a counsellor.  
4.2.1 Social Skills 
The relationship between the client and counsellor is certainly professional but it requires a 
human touch to be fruitful. A person -to-person relationship can be a basic foundation for an 
effective counselling process. As such, counsellors need social skills to establish working 
relationships. The three most important requirements for counsellors are —credibility, 
confidentiality and attention.  
Credibility 
Credibility is an important consideration in choosing a counsellor. It implies two things:  
 · Enhancing expertise by study and practice 
127 
 
 · Creating trust by maintaining integrity in relationships  
A counsellor will be successful only when he can apply knowledge of behavioural sciences to 
the art of counselling and guidance. 
Confidentiality 
Counselling takes place in privacy with an assurance of confidentiality. Confidential issues 
are fully discussed before embarking on the first session. Here, the parts of the discussion 
which cannot be revealed will be made clear to the counsellor. Counsellors are obliged not to 
reveal them to other professionals, friends or family members. 
In the beginning, many people are nervous and evasive. Some may be wrought with 
inferiority complex. Social skills are required to make interactions smooth and pleasant. The 
idea is to make clients ready to face and work with their issues. At the end of the counselling 
process, they should feel liberated, self -empowered, and stress free. As a part of social skills, 
encouragers are to be used. 
Attention  
Attention can be indicated by verbal messages and non -verbal signs. ‘Hello! Please come in’, 
‘How-do-you-do’-like greetings supported by statements like, ‘Well! We will now examine 
your problems’, or ‘I am interested in knowing your mind or thoughts going on in your mind 
right now’, can help create warmth in the ensuing relationship. 
4.2.2 Learning Skills 
Counselling is a process of learning about the client’s situation and extending help. Each 
counselling instance is a case study to be added to the knowledge base and a source of new 
experience in learning. 
Sensory skills 
This refers to the sensitivity with which one has to grasp information. Endowed with five 
senses, we receive a lot of information from the environment and the people with whom we 
interact. Counsellors have to sharpen their five senses in order to receive information from 
different perspectives. Some people have extra -sensory perceptions and some counsellors 
develop them. It means seeing beyond the obvious. It provides an unusual insight of others’ 
views and enables interaction with them.  
Perceptual skills 
Perception is the way we see things. It is the process of understanding messages without 
gathering further information. Perceptual blocks reduce the ability to understand information 
correctly. It results in misinterpretation of the client and his issues. Forming quick 
impressions, stereotyping (women are weak, so Suja is also weak), taking a neutral stance in 
evaluation (central tendency –not caring extreme points), attributing one quality to all other 
observations (he is good in mathematics, so he must be good in all other subjects), etc., are 
perceptual problems. It is important to check perception by cognition, to establish the right 
images or impressions. For instance, a client may appear to be rough and tough at first sight, 
but during interaction the counsellor may discover that he is soft and timid by nature.  
128 
 
Cognitive skills 
Cognition is a process of learning. It is a process of asking why, what, where, who, when and 
how to know the different dimensions of a subject chosen for understanding. It is a process of 
reasoning to establish logical understanding of the phenomenon. The analytical thinking 
process goes like: I am unhappy because my boss has shouted at me. Why am I unhappy? Is 
it because I could not finish the work, or because my boss shouted at me, or used insulting 
words?  
Reflexivity 
It is to do with the ability to adapt to the mode of explanation of the client. As the client 
changes his or her ways of construing events, so too must the counsellor. The counsellor has 
to be involved in a reflexive process, seeking to make his or her own interpretation explicit 
by interaction with the client.  
Suspension  
A counsellor has to develop the skill of suspending his own judgement and construing events 
so as to subsume the client’s reality. 
Use of suspension is also found in reconstruction of what the client has said. A specific 
experience or event that does not fit in the structure of understanding may be suspended for a 
while. It is kept in memory to be used if found relevant in the reconstruction process at a later 
stage.  
Dilation and constriction  
These terms refer to re -organization of construing systems when dealing with 
incompatibilities. The client can dilate the perceptual field in the following ways:  
 · Behave aggressively and widen his areas of interest 
 · Jump from topic to topic and see possibilities everywhere 
 · Start seeing things as being related to his problem  
Constriction 
This is a process of limiting issues. It helps in dealing with chaos and anxiety by avoiding 
incompatibilities. It helps shrink the world to a manageable size.  
Observation  
In the interaction process, words and actions are related to the articulated and observed frame 
of reference in a flexible manner. Observation of the client’s body language is important to 
make meaningful interpretation of messages. A counsellor needs meta -communication skills 
to ‘see through’ what the client says:  
Client: (loud, quick and harsh tone): My boss should not have spoken like that in front of my 
team members.  
Counsellor: Your voice suggests that you are very irritated.  
Client: Yes. You got me right. When I think of the incident, I experience a surge of anger.  
129 
 
Counsellors make notes of the discussion. This should not, however, interfere with the 
observation. If need be, a pause may be taken while making notes. Skill is necessary to 
balance observation and note taking.  
4.2.3 Communication Skills 
Communication is at the core of counselling. A counsellor should be effective in oral and 
non-verbal communication. He or she should be good in speaking and listening.  
Attention  
This is the most important skill required of a counsellor. If the counsellor does not pay 
attention to the client from the moment he enters the room, he feels unworthy of attention and 
develops anxiety. The counsellor’s verbal and non -verbal messages together send powerful 
message of welcome to the clients. It should be like this when interpreted: ‘Welcome. I am 
interested in you and in what you would say. I am willing to listen to your problems, 
understand your feelings and share your concerns.’  
Non-verbal signals 
The supporting non-verbal signals can be:  
 · Posture: Sit upright and relax. Do not slouch in the chair.  
 · Eye contact: Maintain direct eye contact, occasionally looking away from the 
client. The counsellor should not stare at the client; his looks should be comforting and invite 
the client to talk.  
 · Facial expression: The counsellor should smile with affection and show 
concern by remaining calm and observant, and not laugh.  
 · Seating: A distance of 3, 5 feet is appropriate. The chairs should be of equal 
height. They should be at 90 degrees to give freedom to the client to look at the walls or the 
counsellor.  
Encouragers 
A client may find it hard to continue talking and become silent. The role of the counsellor is 
to interpret the silence and if necessary break it. Some clients expect encouraging words of 
appreciation or inquiry to go on. So there is a need to use ‘continuers’.  
Continuers or encouragers can be verbal or non -verbal. They mean precisely that the 
counsellor is interested. Non -verbal expressions include smiles and grimaces, nodding the 
head, leaning forward, making sounds like ‘umm, ahh’, etc. The support can be expressed as 
follows: 
 · Assertive: ‘I am listening’, ‘I am with you’, ‘I follow you’, with a smile, 
nodding of the head, looking at the client and jotting down what the client is saying.  
 · Permission: ‘I want to listen, please go ahead’, with a curious expression on 
the face, eyes searching, head nodding and leaning forward.  
 · Request: ‘I want to understand more about your experience’, with an open 
posture, sitting upright and talking in a gentle voice.  
130 
 
· Direction: ‘Can you tell me more about the incident that angered you last 
week..’? Or ‘I’m curious about ......’ 
Listening skills 
Listening in the context of counselling is called credulous listening. It starts with the belief 
that whatever the client is construing is true. However, that does not mean accepting the 
client’s views without further questioning. 
Listening is a complex activity because the human brain is a limited processor of information. 
The cognitive view of learning sees listening as a process with ‘pre’ activities, ‘while’ 
activities, and ‘post’ activities. 
A pre-listening task gives listeners the opportunity to use what they already know —their 
prior knowledge—to help them do the task. Prior knowledge is organized in schemata (the 
plural form of schema), also called internal frame of reference. It consists of abstract, 
generalized mental representations of our experience that are available to help us understand 
new experiences. 
We process the information we hear in both top-down and bottom-up ways.  
· Top-down means using prior knowledge and experiences; we know certain things 
about certain topics and situations and use that information for comprehension.  
· Bottom-up processing means using the information we have about sounds, word 
meanings and discourse markers like first, then and after that to assemble our 
understanding of what we read or hear, one step at a time.  
Counsellors need both bottom-up and top-down processing skills in listening. They must hear 
some sounds (bottom-up processing), hold them in their working memory long enough (a few 
seconds) to connect them to each other and then interpret what they have just heard before 
something new comes along. At the same time, listeners use their background knowledge 
(top-down processing) to determine meanings with respect to prior knowledge and schemata. 
Listening can be done in two ways: listening for main ideas and listening for details. ‘What’s 
the most important idea in this conversation? What is the main thing they are talking about?’ 
Speakers do not always say what they want to say. Sometimes they do not have clarity in 
their thoughts.  
Listening is purposeful. Post-listening questions like what? how? how much? can be useful to 
check whether purposeful understanding is achieved.  
Feedback in the form of questions, paraphrasing, re -stating etc., is necessary to make 
listening effective. The reasons are:  
· Listening is a real time activity. There is no second chance unless, of course, 
the listener specifically asks for repetition.  
· Listening involves understanding all types of reductions of sounds and 
blending of words. The listener needs clarifications.  
· When there is a gap in understanding, listeners tend to ‘fill in the blanks’ with 
contextual guesses using their prior knowledge.  
131 
 
People do not always say exactly what they mean. That is, important aspects of meaning are 
sometimes implied rather than stated. Listeners have to ‘listen between the lines’ to figure out 
what really is meant. 
Some listening problems arise due to individual learning approaches. These are:  
· Problem of selective reception: Receiving requires not only an attentive ear but also 
an open mind. People tend to select the information that they think is useful and listen to that 
extent. In choosing what to receive, counsellors have to be careful. Key ideas are to be 
captured and listening should be done in a way to enhance their understanding.  
· Filtering: Understanding is influenced by filtering. People tend to wear coloured 
glasses of their choice and see the world through them. Such interpretations may be based on 
their own experience, and biases may be misleading. Care is necessary before establishing 
understanding.  
Responding to the client’s questions 
In the process of interaction, clients may raise some questions and expect counsellors to 
respond appropriately. The questions may be about the client’s own personality, behaviour or 
thoughts and the counsellor–client relationship. Some typical questions are: 
Client: Do you think I am a timid person?  
Client: What do you think about my joining the new organization? Did I make a mistake?  
Client: Am I troublesome, demanding more from you?  
The counsellor has to think carefully before answering such questions. The nature of response 
depends on the following needs:  
 · Need for assurance or sympathy: In the early stages of counselling, the client 
views the counsellor as an expert and seeks guidance at each and every step; that is, his or her 
dependence is high. What the client needs perhaps is an encourager and not a specific answer 
to the question. In such cases, instead of answering a question, encouragement should be 
provided.  
 · Need for advice: Some clients look for an informative answer. As a part of 
counselling, expert advice of the counsellor is sought. In such cases, answers that extend 
professional help should be provided. 
 
Speaking skills  
Good communication is essential to counsellors. As you can see, each stage of the 
counselling process paves the way for another –providing a base for progression from 
ambiguity to clarity. As you move through each stage, you will gain an understanding of the 
problems, perspectives and insights. Counselling is essentially a communication process and 
counsellors should be good communicators.  
Table 4.1 shows the communication actions required at the different stages of counselling.  
132 
 
 
Table 4.1 Communication during Counselling Stages 
4.2.4 Probing Skills  
Probing involves deep exploration to know extensively as well as intensively the problems 
and related aspects. The inquiry process may make use of several methods such as:  
 · Questioning techniques 
 · Statements  
133 
 
 · Reflective methods  
Questioning techniques  
We will now examine the different types of questions that a counsellor can make use of. We 
will also examine the possible effects of each type of question.  
(a) Open questions: These are invitations to a client to speak openly and enthusiastically 
about the issues bothering him or her. The questions usually begin with what, how, where 
etc., and seek elaborate explanations from the client. Consider this example:   
Counsellor: What happens when you go late to work? How many days were you late and 
what happened most of the times?  
(b) Hypothetical questions: These are open questions that encourage a client to speculate 
about their own feelings, views and behaviour, and those of others. This help  identify the 
future consequences and weigh their impact on the client’s future life. As a result, a lot of 
unknown fears become known, and clients gain confidence to treat themselves as challengers. 
An example is given here: 
Counsellor: If you leave the company what will happen? If you stay what will happen?  
 If the client’s reply is, ‘I don’t know’,  
 Counsellor: If you don’t know, what will you do?  
 If the client’s reply is, ‘I know’,  
 Counsellor: If you know the consequence, how do you see it? As a serious one? As an 
important one?  
(c) Why questions: Some clients may not know the reasons for their behaviour and some 
others may know but prefer not to reveal them. In either case, a question that seeks to elicit 
reasons for the behaviour may not get a proper answer. An exception is a rational transaction. 
When the client and counsellor have adult –to-adult transactions, questions like ‘Why do you 
hate our boss?’ may find answers.  
(d) Closed questions: Questions that require simply ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers are less desirable. 
They limit the expression of the client and make the process of inquiry cumbersome. The 
counsellor has to put across several questions to obtain a complete picture of the situation. 
Note the following example:  
Client: I am planning to quit the job.  
Counsellor: Who all have been informed about your plan? (Open question)  
Instead of the open question, the counsellor may ask several yes/no questions as given under: 
Client: I am planning to quit the job.  
Counsellor: Did you inform your boss?  
 Client: No 
 Counsellor: Have you shared your plan with your team members?  
134 
 
 Client: No 
Counsellor: Did you discuss with your family members?  
(e) Either/or questions: These questions place the client in a dilemmatic situation and make 
him or her become reserved in expressing opinions. Exploration has limited power and does 
not help counsellors in getting full information. Here is an example:  
Counsellor: Is it your boss or the nature of work that is causing dissatisfaction in your present 
job?  
The options are limited to two. Instead, consider the open question, which offers scope for 
exploring multiple options.  
Counsellor: What in your view are the causal factors for dissatisfaction in your present job?  
(f) Multiple questions: When a counsellor asks many questions at one shot, the result is often 
unsatisfactory. The client may be baffled by the variety of questions, not knowing where to 
begin and what to say. 
Counsellor: Did you talk to your boss? Did you notify your employer that you are quitting the 
job? Did you collect your papers from the new employer?  
(g) Leading questions: Leading questions are those which communicate to the respondent that 
a certain reply is expected. These are loaded with a suggestion and influence the client’s 
mind. Sometimes they may be embarrassing to the client. An example would make the point 
clear.  
Client: The job is challenging and work environment is good. But I am unhappy with 
the pay and benefits.  
 Counsellor: Are you going to say that you feel like leaving the company? 
The client has not revealed his future plans. The counsellor did so by framing a question with 
a suggestive answer. These are undesirable as they affect the freedom of the client.  
To use the questioning technique in an effective manner, let us find out the purpose of 
questioning. Questions serve the following purposes:  
· Help clients to focus on a specific area or issue 
· Provide an opportunity to explain with an open mind  
· Allow clients to have full control of their thoughts and opinions. 
Effective questions are those which have the following characteristics:  
· Specific  
· Clear 
· Concise 
· Direct 
· Open 
135 
 
Statements 
Inquiry need not be based on interrogative approaches. By stating the questions in an 
assertive or declaratory form, one can secure information. This is a mild and gentle form of 
inquiry. Questions may be intrusive or impersonal, whereas statements are more friendly and 
supportive to the client. Consider the following examples: 
Counsellor: What are you going to do now? (question form)  
Counsellor: You said you are unhappy with your boss. I wonder how you respond to him.  
Reflective methods   
The ability to communicate with the client’s internal frame of reference is called reflective 
skill. It first involves understanding what is in the mind of the client. Such an understanding 
is possible by active listening – both words and body language – and interpreting the 
information in an appropriate manner using the probing questions and clarification methods. 
Second, it involves conveying rightly such understanding to the client. Reflecting ensures that 
the external frame of reference (the framework of understanding created by what the client 
has said) is the same as the internal frame of reference (what the client has in his mind). 
Reflective skills can be viewed as a set of three skills: Re -stating, paraphrasing and 
summarizing.  
(a) Re-stating: The counsellor can respond with a word or phrase to encourage the client to 
speak further. Example:  
Client: My boss always criticizes me. He never gives  me any credit …always finds fault with 
whatever I do … should I leave the company…I wonder? 
Counsellor: Criticizing?  
(To know more about the contexts and purpose of criticizing. Who is to blame? Client or boss 
of a client?)  
(b) Paraphrasing: This is the ability to state a key idea from what the client has said. It helps 
gain focus on the important tracts and themes.  
Client: Since childhood, I have been an active person. I won several medals and prizes. I 
stood first in examinations. Of course, due to interest in literature, I could not do well during 
college days. But I have authored two books and they brought me recognition in society. I 
was rated as a fine team leader and given a promotion last year.  
Counsellor: You mean you are a good achiever. 
(c) Summarizing: Summarizing is a process of condensation by integrating key ideas to make 
a precise explanation of what the client has said in detail. Summaries made in the first stage 
of counselling are called attending summaries.  
4.2.5 Problem-Solving Skills 
These refer to a set of skills that helps see the problem, and search for solutions.  
Scanning skills  
136 
 
Scanning is the process of scrutinizing the information relating to a particular problem area. It 
seeks to look in and look around to gather details about the problem. It presents a problems 
map.  
Futuristic thinking skills  
This kind of thinking is essential for making solutions durable. It examines the acts in terms 
of their impact both on other people and on oneself. The key question is: If this solution is 
chosen, what can happen?  
Multiple scenarios 
The counsellor asks his client to generate several imaginary pictures of what the future would 
be like. After identifying a range of possible pictures of the future, the client will be asked to 
choose one which is more realistic and workable for him or her. 
For instance, a client facing a work –life balance problem, may visualize the following 
imaginary pictures: 
 · I would stay at home till my children attain the age of ten years.  
· I would be doing a part time job. My husband will support me and take care of 
the children. 
· I would be doing a flexi -time job. I would adjust my work schedules to meet 
my family’s demands.  
· I would be a doing full -time job and my in -laws/parents will take care of my 
domestic needs.  
For a client who cannot receive support from either parents or in -laws, the last option would 
be unrealistic. For women, whose spouses are non -cooperative, the second option is 
theoretical. The first option is less feasible in case the woman needs to support the family. 
When flexi-time jobs are not offered by local organizations, the client has to make further 
exploration of opportunities to build scenarios.  
Sentence completion 
This is a very simple way of getting clients to think about the future. It allows the client to see 
the positive and negative ‘future states’ of a person and choose the one that is close to his or 
her own preferences and expectations. In the work –life balance problem, the counsellor asks 
the client to fill in the following sentences. 
 · If my husband is supportive… 
 · If my in-laws are supportive…  
Diagnostic skills 
It is a process of identifying the symptoms and causes of problems. Symptoms are manifest 
indications of a problem but they are not the root causes. In -depth analysis to find the cause –
effect relationship is essential to come out with the right problem definitions. George Kelly 
refers to diagnosis in counselling as transitive diagnosis. This means the counsellor will find 
137 
 
out how the client has moved from one situation to another and what factors have influenced 
the transition process.  
Analytical skills 
Analytical thinking is a process of breaking an issue into different aspects and examining 
each aspect or idea to gain a complete understanding. It is a process of identifying variables 
and cause -and-effect relationships, For instance, job dissatisfaction may be due to 
unpleasantness. What factors caused unpleasantness or what are its dimensions? Nature of 
work, relationship with boss, relationship with peers, work environment, pay and benefits, etc 
are the factors. Which ones are pleasant and which ones are unpleasant? Such questioning 
leads to analysis.  
Force-field analysis 
Kurt Lewin (1969) evolved this technique of examining the factors that inhibit/hinder or 
promote/facilitate a decision or a situation. Consider the work –life balance problem. 
Facilitating factors for a client may be: 
 · Attractive remuneration that improves economic stability  
 · Hiring support services is possible 
 · Company has flexi-time facility  
Hindering factors can be:  
 · Children need mother’s care 
 · Support services are not reliable and also costly 
 · In-laws are opposed to employment 
The role of the counsellor is passive if the client can evolve the force -field on his or her own. 
If the client requires help, the counsellor should suggest ways to explore the map of 
possibilities and factors influencing them.  
Creative thinking skills 
Creative thinking goes beyond what is apparent. Thinking within the system tends to be 
limited in scope and provides limited answers. It is important to expand the horizon of think 
and find new and unusual ways to respond to situations. Brainstorming is a creative thinking 
tool. It is an idea generation technique. It helps one think beyond existing options to 
experimental ideas that have not so far been considered infeasible or ruled out as unrealistic. 
The guidelines for brainstorming are:  
 · Invite clients to voice their ideas in a relaxed, open and free atmosphere.  
 · Ask them to suspend their judgement and focus only on idea generation. 
 · Help them build new ideas on the existing or stated ones. 
 · Record ideas.  
 · Limit the session to 15–20 minutes.  
138 
 
 · Evaluate the ideas for implementation and choose one. 
4.2.6 Negotiating Skills 
Clients meet counsellors for help. However, they take time to change their perspectives and 
find solutions. They look for solutions that do not require much behavioural modifications or 
attitudinal changes. They seek easy and quick solutions. Sometimes, counsellors might have 
to convince the clients to take difficult routes in order, to find durable remedies. In such 
cases,  negotiation skills become important.  
Change management skills  
George Kelly describes the cycle of change as a process of five stages, which are as follows:  
· Anticipation: The client looks into the future with expectations and emotional 
feelings like fear, anxiety and hope. 
· Commitment: The client decides to involve and experiment with the change 
process and invest his or her time and energy.  
· Encounter: The client faces the change process and acts in accordance with the 
agreement for change.  
· Confirmation/Disconfirmation: The outcomes confirm the expected results 
and reinforce new behaviour. In case of failure, the client and counsellor 
realize that the change is not effective.  
· Constructive revision: In case of both positive and negative outcome, revision 
is important. In the former, it aims at refinement. In the latter case, it seeks to 
creatively develop new change processes.  
Overcoming resistance 
Clients resist change. Such resistance is common in many contexts of change. However, the 
reasons for resisting change vary from one context to another. The general reasons for 
resisting change are outlined here:  
· Fear of the unknown: Uncertainty about the future and the inability to perceive 
benefits and risks create fear and anxiety in the minds of clients. For example, job 
change is a case of anxiety. How will the new work environment be? How will 
relations with people be there? Such questions and doubts become a source of anxiety.  
· Constraints: A person may face certain stumbling blocks on the path of 
change. For instance, in a job change problems like disturbance to children’s 
education, leaving ailing parents, and non -transferable job of spouse, can become 
stumbling blocks.  
· Perceived rewards are unattractive: When the perceived benefits of change are 
not attractive, change will be unacceptable to the client.  
· Lack of skills: Another barrier to moving into a new situation is lack of the 
skills required. When a client lacks the skills of managing the new situation, he or she 
will hesitate to accept the change plan. 
139 
 
 Check Your Progress 
 1. What does credibility imply in a counsellor?  
 2. What do you mean by reflexivity in counselling?  
 3. Name the stages in the cycle of change as described by George Kelly.  
 
4.3 Models of Counselling 
An analysis of a set of facts in relation to each other is better known as a ‘theory’ has 
an effect on how ‘client communication is conceptualized, new interpersonal relationships 
develop, how professional ethics are implemented, and how counsellor’s view themselves as 
professionals’ (Corey, Neukrug, Mc Aulilife, Prate and Lovell, 1990). Without theoretical 
packing, counsellors’ operate haphazardly in a trial -and-error manner and risk being both 
ineffective and harmful. 
According to Shostrom (1977) ‘theory helps to explain what happens in a counselling 
relationship and assists the counsellor in predicting, evaluating, and improving results. It 
provides a framework for making scientific observation about counselling. Theorizing 
encourages the coherence of ideas about counselling and the production of new ideas.’ Hence, 
counselling theory can be very practical in the sense that they help to make sense of the 
counsellor’s observation in work and thus provide direction. 
Boy and Fine (1983) further state that theory is the why behind the how of counsellor roles. It 
provides a framework within which a counsellor can operate. Boy and Fine have given the 
following six functions of theory that make counselling practical: 
· Theory helps counsellors find unity and relatedness within the diversity of 
existence. 
· Theory compels counsellors to examine relationships they could otherwise 
overlook. 
· Theory gives counsellors operational guidelines by which to work and helps 
them in evaluating their development as professionals. 
· Theory helps counsellors focus on relevant data and tells them what to look 
for. 
· Theory helps counsellors assist clients in the effective modification of their 
behaviour. 
· Theory helps counsellors evaluate both old and new approaches to the process 
of counselling. It is the base from which new counselling approaches are 
constructed. 
The ultimate criterion for all counselling theories is how well they provide explanations of 
what occurs in counselling (Kelly,1988) and to what degree they organize information which 
is grounded in the reality of people’s lives (Young,1988). 
140 
 
In short, an effective counsellor decides which theory or theories and methods to use on the 
basis of educational background, philosophy, and the needs of the clients. All approaches are 
not appropriate for all counsellors or clients, but a theoretical base is very important for every 
effective counsellor. 
An effective counsellor decides which theory or theories and methods to use on the basis of 
educational background, philosophy and the needs of the clients. Not all approaches are 
appropriate for all counsellors or clients, but a theoretical base is necessary for every effective 
counsellor. We have already discussed some of the theories as part of the approaches to 
counselling. Here, we will discuss some more specific ones. 
4.3.1 Rogers Model of Counselling Skills 
Carl Rogers developed client -centred therapy as a reaction against what he considered the 
basic limitations of psychoanalysis. For instance, 
· Rogers (1951) objected to the use of the word patient because of its 
connotation of debility.  He instead advocated the use of word client to convey ‘one 
who comes actively and voluntarily to gain help on a problems, but without any 
notion of surrendering his own responsibility for the situation’. 
· He reacted against the directives of Freudian therapy. He believed that the 
initiative for change should come from the client and hence stated that counselling 
should be nondirective in nature. 
· He also rejected the principal of unconsciousness and replaced it with the new 
concept of the phenomenological view of the client. The phenomenological view of 
the client suggests that the counselor should accept the client’s feelings and world 
view as they are presented, rather than looking for hidden meaning underneath. 
Essentially, the client -centered approach is a specialized branch of humanistic therapy that 
high lights the experiencing of a client and his or her subjective and phenomenal world. The 
therapist functions mainly as a facilitator of personal growth by helping the client discover 
his or her own capacities for solving problems. The client -centered approach puts great faith 
in the client’s capacity to lead the way in therapy and find his or her own direction. The 
therapeutic relationship between the therapist and the client acts as a catalyst for change and 
is a means of increasing awareness and discovering latent resources that the client can use 
constructively in changing their life. Roger (1957) sees people as socialized and positive 
forward-moving, constructive, realistic and trustworthy individuals who are striving to 
become fully functional and deep down are basically good. Each person is aware, inner -
directed, and moving toward self-actualization from infancy onwards. 
Characteristics of client-centred approach 
It focuses on the client’s responsibility and capacity to discover ways to fully face reality. It 
emphasizes the phenomenal world of the client with accurate empathy and an attempt to 
apprehend the client’s internal frame of reference. The therapist concerns him -self or her-self 
mainly with the client’s self -perception and perception of the world. It applies the same 
principle of psychotherapy to all persons— normal, neurotics, and psychotics. 
 
141 
 
The therapeutic process  
The basic goal of therapy is to provide a climate which will suitably aid the individual 
become a fully functioning person. The characteristics that constitute the basic goals of 
client-centred therapy are as follows: 
· Openness to experience: refers to seeing reality without distorting it to fit a 
preconceived self-structure. It also means that one’s beliefs are not rigid; and that one 
can remain open to further knowledge and growth and can tolerate ambiguity. One has 
an awareness of oneself in the present moment and also has the capacity to experience 
oneself in fresh ways. 
· Trust in one’s organism: refers to the experience that as clients become more 
open to their experiences, their sense of trust in self begins to emerge. 
· An internal locus of evaluation: means looking more to oneself for the answers 
to the problems of existence. 
· Willingness to be a process: it emphasizes the concept of self in the process of 
becoming as opposed to the concept of self as a product. 
In the client-centred approach the therapist does not choose specific goals for the client as he 
or she believes that the clients have the capacity to define and clarify their own goals. 
According to Rogers (1961), as a result of person -centered counselling clients should 
become: 
 · More realistic in their self-perceptions. 
 · More confident and self-directing. 
 · More positively valued by themselves. 
 · Less likely to repress aspects of their experiences. 
 · More mature, socialized and adaptive in their behaviour. 
 · Less upset by stress and quicker to recover from it. 
 · More like the healthy integrated well -functioning person in their personality 
structures. 
The therapist’s function is to establish a therapeutic climate that facilitates the client’s growth 
along a process continuum in which the client will ‘experience the necessary freedom to 
explore areas of his or her life that are now either denied to awareness or are distorted’. 
Instead of perceiving the client in pre-concerned diagnostic categories, the therapist meets the 
client on a moment -to-moment experiential basis and helps the client by entering the client’s 
world. 
The counsellor is aware of the verbal and non -verbal language of the client and the counselor 
reflects back what he or she is hearing or observing (Braaten, 1986).                             
Person-centred counsellors make limited use of psychological tests. Only if the client 
requests, testing is usually done. The counsellor then focuses on the meaning of the test for 
142 
 
that client rather than on test scores. One innovative test often used in evaluating clients is the 
Q-sort technique (Hergenhahu,1984). This procedure has three steps: 
· The client is given hundred cards, each of which contains a self -descriptive 
sentence, such as ‘I am intelligent’. 
· The client is asked to place the cards in nine piles from ‘most like me’ to ‘least 
like me’. After this self-sort, the client sorts the cards again by placing them according 
to how he or she would ideally like to do. 
· The final step of the process involves correlating the degree of similarity 
between the two sorts before, during and after counselling. 
The client’s experience in therapy  
Clients initially may expect the counsellor to provide awareness and direction or view the 
counsellor as the expert who can provide magical solutions. Within the client -ordered 
framework however, they soon realize that they are responsible for themselves in the 
relationship and that they can learn to be free by using the relationship to gain greater self -
understanding. 
During the beginning stages of therapy, the client’s behaviour and feeling might be 
characterized by extremely rigid beliefs and attitudes, much internal blockage, a lack of 
centeredness, a sense of living out of touch with his or her own feelings, an unwillingness to 
communicate deeper levels of the self, a fear of intimacy, a basic distrust in the self, a sense 
of fragmentation and tendency to externalize feelings and problems, just to mention a few. In 
the therapeutic climate created by the counselor, the client is able to explore in a safe and 
trusting environment the hidden aspects of his or her personal world. 
As therapy progresses, the client is able to express fears, anxiety, guilt, shame, anger, hatred 
and other feelings that he or she had deemed too positive to accept and incorporate into the 
self-structure.    
The relationship between therapist and client: The therapist and client relationship has a 
special ‘I -thou’ personal quality. It is the relationship with a congruent, accepting, and 
empathic counsellor that serves as the agent of therapeutic change for the client. According to 
Roger, there are certain attributes on the therapist’s part (genuineness, Non -possessive 
warmth and acceptance, and accurate empathy) that constitute the necessary and sufficient 
conditions for therapeutic effectiveness to occur within the client. Client -centred therapy 
focuses on the ‘here -and-now’ experience created by the relationship between the client and 
the therapist. 
According to Roger (1967), the following six conditions are necessary and sufficient for 
personality change to occur within the client-therapist relationship: 
 1. Two persons are in psychological contact. 
2. The first person called as the client, is in a state of incongruence, being 
vulnerable or anxious. 
3. The second person called as the therapist, is congruent or integrated in the 
relationship. 
143 
 
 4. The therapist experiences unconditional positive regard for the client. 
5. The therapist experiences an empathic understanding of the client’s internal 
frame of reference and tries to communicate this experience to the client. 
6. The communication to the client of the therapist is empathic and 
understanding and unconditional positive regard is to a minimal degree 
achieved. 
Roger further added that these conditions do not vary according to client type. Further, they 
are necessary and sufficient for all approaches to therapy and apply to all personal 
relationships and not just to psychotherapy alone. 
There are three personal characteristics of the therapist that form a central part of the 
therapeutic relationship .These are: 
 · Congruence or genuineness: Congruence implies that the therapist is real, i.e. 
the therapist is genuine, integrated, and authentic during the therapy. He or she is without a 
false front; his or her inner experience and outer expression of that experience match, and he 
or she can openly express feelings and attitudes that are present in the relationship with the 
client. The therapist can facilitate honest communication with the client by expressing (and 
accepting) any positive feelings. Client -centered therapy does, however, stress the value of a 
non-exploitive, authentic, personal relationship and the positive value of open and honest 
feedback when meaningful communication is blocked. 
 · Unconditional regard: Unconditional  regard is a deep and genuine caring for 
the client as a person. The caring is unconditional on that it is not contaminated by evaluation 
or judgement of the client’s feelings, thoughts, and behaviour as good or bad. The therapist 
values and warmly accepts the client as he or she is. In this sense acceptance is the 
recognition of the client’s right to have feelings. The therapist’s caring should be non -
possessive and should not stem from the therapist’s own need to be liked and appreciated, as 
then the change in the client would be inhibited. Like congruence, unconditional positive 
regard is a matter of degree on a continuum. The greater the degree of liking, caring, and 
warmly accepting the client; the greater is the opportunity to facilitate change in the client.  
 · Accurate empathic understanding: One of the main tasks of the therapist is to 
be sensitive and comprehend accurately the client’s experiences and feelings as they come 
forth during the moment -to-moment interaction during the therapy session. The therapist 
aims and tries ‘to sense’ the client’s subjective experience, particularly the here -and-now 
experience. “The aim of empathic understanding is to encourage the client to get closer to 
himself or herself, to experience feelings more deeply and intensely and to recognize and 
resolve the incongruity that exists within the client.” The therapist can communicate to the 
client an understanding of what is already known to the client and can also explain the 
meaning of experience of which the client is only dimly aware. Empathy is more than a mere 
reflection of feeling. It is a deep and subjective understanding of the client by the therapist. It 
can also be understood as a sense of personal identification with the client, when the therapist 
can grasp the personal experiencing of the client’s private world. 
 
 
144 
 
Techniques  
Person-centred techniques have evolved through the years. Hart (1970), identified three 
periods of this evolution, each of which stresses different techniques. These three periods 
have been described below: 
 · Non-directive period (1940 -1950): During this period the therapist -client 
relationship was emphasized by creating a permissive and non -interventional atmosphere. 
The main techniques used were acceptance and clarification. 
 · Reflective period (1950 -1957): The major emphasis was laid on creating a 
non-threatening relationship. The techniques used for the same were responding to client’s 
feelings and reflecting back to clients underlying affect. 
 · Experiential period (1957 -1980): During this period Roger emphasized that 
the empathy, positive regard and genuineness are three necessary and sufficient conditions of 
counseling. “The techniques that were used to promote the client -therapist relationship were 
active and passive listening; accurate reflection of thoughts and feelings; clarification; 
summarization; confrontation and open-ended leads.” (Poppen and Thompson, 1974). 
Overall, the person-centred approach places a minimum emphasis on formal techniques and a 
maximum focus on the therapeutic relationship. 
Application to school  
The philosophy underlying client -centred theory has direct application to the teaching or 
learning process. As Roger believes that the student can be trusted to discover significant 
problems that are related to the student’s existence. The students can become involved in 
meaningful learning, which can best occur when the teacher creates a climate of freedom and 
trust. The teacher’s function is like that of the client -centred therapist, where the teacher with 
his genuineness, openness, honesty, acceptance, understanding, empathy and willingness 
allows students to explore personally meaningful material and create the atmosphere in which 
significant learning can occur.  
Evaluation of client-centred approach  
Some of the major strengths of the client-centred approach are given below: 
· It revolutionized the profession of counselling by linking counselling with 
psychotherapy. 
· This approach has generated a great amount of research and initially set the 
standard for doing research on the counselling variables. In fact, Roger was 
the first practitioner to make audiotape recordings of the counselling sessions. 
· According to Grummon (1972), the person -centred approach is effective as it 
helps improve psychological adjustment, learning and frustration tolerance 
and helps decrease defensiveness. 
· The approach focuses on the importance of an open client -counsellor 
relationship and the short term nature of the process. 
145 
 
· It emphasizes that the client and not the counsellor is the centre or the focus of 
the counselling process and therefore the initiative to overcome the problems 
should come from the client itself. 
· It emphasizes the importance of the counselling relationship in facilitating 
change. 
· It also stresses the counsellor’s attitude than the technique used by him/her in 
making the therapeutic relationship effective. 
· The approach takes a relatively short time to learn and lays emphasis on 
mastering the listening skills. In this regard, it forms the basis for training 
many paraprofessional helpers. 
· It also adopts a positive view of human nature and believes that people can 
change and it thus emphasises the change process. 
However, this approach has certain limitations too: 
· It has limited applicability and is seldom employed with severely handicapped 
or young children (Thompson and Rudolph, 1988). 
 · The approach is considered to be overly optimistic by many critics. 
· Some believe that this approach cannot make a permanent impact on the 
person as it is short term and deals only with surface issues and it does not 
challenge the client to explore deeper areas. 
 · The approach seems to have the same goal for all clients of self -actualization. 
This general goal does not take into account the individual needs of clients. 
· This approach does not consider the category of people who accept little 
responsibility for their problems. 
· Also, it emphasizes the affective aspects of behaviour and ignores the 
important role played by the intellectual, cognitive and rational aspects of 
behaviour. 
In short, this approach has much to offer to the field of counselling. 
4.3.2 Carkhuff Model of Counselling Skills, 
Carkhuff’s book, Toward Effective Counselling and Psychotherapy, was published in 1967. A 
more thorough study of Carkhuff’s book, Helping and Human Relations, V olumes  I and II, 
was published in 1969. His work gradually transformed clinical psychology as well as 
counselling in educational setting. 
· Robert R. Carkhuff created the helping and human relationship theory to 
explain how people interact in the professional setting. 
· Creating definitions and observing interactions before engaging in any helping 
behaviour were the first steps in Carkhuff’s model. 
 · He thought that all interactions between people are helpful. 
146 
 
 · Some interactions are more balanced than others. 
· In some encounters, the dominant party tries to persuade the other person  to 
change, usually to their point of view. 
· Other interactions involve a transaction, where each participant is pursuing a 
distinct objective. 
· Carkhuff thought that most professional encounters were beneficial to 
relationships. 
· He listed repairmen, training, parenting, medical, and teaching among these 
professions. In other words, helping behaviours are a universal skill  among 
everyone. 
· In order to end successful relationships and assess their success, Carkhuff 
developed his helping model and human relations theory. 
· One of the helping professions is nursing, which involves engagement with the 
client to improve their condition. There is helper relationship theory in 
nursing. 
· This framework for the art of helping and human relationships developed by 
nursing theorists matches the nurse-client relationship quite well. 
The four elements of any helping relationship form the basis of Robert R. Carkhuff’s model. 
These elements are discussed below. 
Attending 
Attending entails starting the conversation. There is a greeting, an introduction of each party 
to the relationship, and an effort to make the client feel comfortable. In accordance with the 
human relationship theory and Carkhuff’s model of helping, the nurse must be there in 
person. This implies that the nurse is entirely focused on the client and that the nurse looks at, 
engages, and speaks to the client in order to ensure that the client is aware that the nurse is 
there for the client’s benefit. The nurse should keep an eye on all of the client’s responses. Is 
the client avoiding interaction with you? Is the client prepared to discuss their issue openly? 
Are they discussing something else to put off having the necessary conversations?  
The nurse must pay close attention to the client and make sure they fully comprehend what 
they are trying to express. He/she must wait for the customer to finish outlining their account 
of the events. To be able to confirm that the client has spoken what the nurse thinks she has 
heard, the nurse should receive training in professional communication techniques. The 
interaction between a nurse and a client depends on this procedure. The interaction will fail if 
the attending step is improperly completed. The following particular skills  help in the 
Attending stage: 
 · Taking note of both verbal and non-verbal cues 
 · Responding fundamental messages with paraphrases 
 · Bringing discussion into focus by making issues clear 
147 
 
 · Review the client’s perceptions of their issue. 
Responding 
The nurse should start informing the client about the expected response and any available 
options once the interaction’s purpose has been established and the client has consented to it. 
The helper starts responding to the client. She looks for feelings to which she can respond. 
She searches for information to explain why the client needs aid. Finally, the nurse must be 
able to comprehend what the client interprets as the issue. The client and the nurse should 
collaborate to come up with a course of action that they can both accept. Responding requires 
a unique set of skills just like attending.  
 · Emphasis should be placed on having empathy for the client’s requirements. 
 · Consider the perspective of the client. 
 · Verify your understanding of the client by using rephrasing. 
Personalizing 
Here, the client commits to take the actions required to carry out the previously set goals. At 
this stage, relating your goals to an earlier action or situation is the best strategy for success. 
The outcomes are better when the situation is more favourable. An unfavourable outcome can 
be utilized as a lesson, however, to demonstrate how the client might alter the outcomes in 
the future. Perhaps difficulties in an  addict’s life caused him to relapse after a period of 
sobriety. This interaction would be focused on helping him consider his options while under 
pressure and learn new coping mechanisms. Personalization requires a separate set of 
abilities. Here are a few to consider: 
 · Expression of feelings 
 · Communicating personal feelings to a client 
 · Communication techniques with clients 
 · Reflective language to confirm objectives 
Initiating 
The nurse helps the client execute or start these adjustments in their lives after they have 
agreed on the measures to change. This part entails creating specific objectives and checklists 
to achieve them. The client needs to be aware of every stage and how to contact the nurse if 
they run into difficulties achieving their goals. The client shouldn’t feel like a failure for 
having to come up with a revised plan if they are made aware that many patients need to 
modify their treatment plan once they begin implementing it into their lives. Success should 
be the main focus instead of strictly adhering to one and only one set of objectives and 
benchmarks. Each professional should also have a feedback phase when they consider both 
their achievement with this client and any areas where they had difficulties. Additionally, it 
will serve as a reminder of the behaviours the caregivers needs to work on in order to 
enhance client outcomes. This step prepares the path for achievement and interaction 
verification. Here are the abilities needed: 
 · The capacity to define useful goals 
148 
 
 · Ability to offer solutions in case of difficulties 
· Additionally, the capacity to conduct enquiries to confirm objective 
completion 
4.3.3 IPR Model of Counselling Training 
The IPR model is described by the APA as a technique used to comprehend psychotherapy 
procedures and to train counsellors and therapists. It entails recording counselling or 
psychotherapy sessions on film or with an audio recorder. They watch these tapes again later, 
and the therapist or counsellor reviews them in front of a supervisor. The client’s counsellor 
or therapist is questioned by the supervisor about their feelings. The IPR model of 
counselling was established by Norman Kagan and colleagues. A strategy for supervision is 
the IPR model. Counsellors are given the ability to comprehend and take action on 
observations that they might not otherwise pay attention to. The IPR model’s objectives are 
to:  
· Make counsellors more aware of their own and their clients’ secret thoughts 
and feelings. 
· To enhance the relationship between the counsellor and the client by practising 
the expression of  secret thoughts and feelings in the present without 
repercussions. 
The foundation of IPR is the idea that, more than any other factor, counsellors’ selective 
perceptions of issues thwart their therapeutic efforts. The foundation of IPR is two elements 
of human behaviour. IPR is founded on two aspects of human nature: the need for one 
another and the development of mutual fear. According to Kagan’s (1980) theory, humans can 
be the greatest source of happiness for one another. But because a person’s first imprinted 
experiences are of being a small being in a large person’s universe, underlying sentiments of 
fear and helplessness could linger all of one’s life. The majority of the time, these fears go 
unacknowledged and unspoken. 
In order to maintain a ‘safe’ psychological distance from others, people who need but fear 
others develop an approach -avoidance syndrome. People consequently frequently act 
diplomatically. According to Kagan (1980), counsellors’ ‘diplomatic’ behaviour can take the 
form of either seeming to be feigning clinical naiveté  or tuning out clients’ communications. 
When counsellors appear as if they did not comprehend the significance behind client 
statements, they are feigning clinical naiveté, which is frequently a sign that they are 
unwilling to become involved with clients at a certain level. 
The majority of time, unskilled counsellors who are preoccupied with their own thoughts will 
tune out. He might be considering his options for the future. As a result, the counsellor misses 
client communications, some of which may appear clear to the supervisor. As a result, neither 
the client nor the counsellor acknowledges a richness of information that is discussed in 
counselling sessions. There are numerous different degrees of interaction, but only a small 
subset of these exchanges are labelled by clients and counsellors (Kagan, 1980). Counsellors 
who tend to behave diplomatically may miss some dynamics of the counsellor/client 
interaction that IPR helps them become more aware of. 
149 
 
In rare cases, the inquirer may meet with the counsellor and his or her client in addition to 
conducting IPR with the counsellor alone. He might just as easily meet with the client by 
himself. Mutual recollection sessions frequently aid counsellors in learning to communicate 
with client. 
Steps in conducting IPR 
A recall session can be conducted using the guidelines below: 
 · Before the supervision session, listen to or watch the recording. Usually, the 
recall session does not allow for a full tape review. It’s crucial to pre -select the tape segments 
that matter most interpersonally. 
 · Tell the supervisee about the recall session. Establish a relaxed atmosphere 
while stressing that there is too much information in counselling sessions for a counsellor to 
cover. Additionally, the session’s goal is for the client and the counsellor to reflect on the 
thoughts and feelings that were discussed throughout the session. 
 · Start playing the recording; at appropriate intervals, one of the participants 
stops it and asks a pertinent lead to affect the study. The supervisee will speak first if the tape 
is stopped, outlining any ideas or emotions that were present at that point in the counselling 
session. By posing pertinent, open -ended inquiries, the supervisor aids in the discovery 
process. Pay attention to the supervisee’s nonverbal reactions during this period of 
questioning and consider any discrepancies between those responses and their spoken 
counterparts. 
 · Avoid using a teaching approach and telling the supervisee what they may 
have done differently during the recall session. Instead, let the supervisee work out their 
emotions and thoughts on their own. 
Conclusion 
IPR offers supervisees a secure setting to explore internal reactions by reliving the client 
interaction through a process recall supervision session. IPR has also been demonstrated to be 
helpful in peer supervision (Kagan, 1980), group supervision (Gimmestad and Greenwood, 
1974), and supervisor -supervised relationships (Bernard, 1989).   IPR has constantly been 
shown to be an efficient medium for supervision in research. For instance, Kagan and 
Krathwohl (1967) and Kingdon (1975) discovered that clients of counsellors who were under 
IPR supervision performed better than clients of counsellors under other types of supervision. 
With experienced counsellors, trainee counsellors, and paraprofessionals, they showed that 
the model works (Bernard, 1989). However, it is easy to magnify the client -counsellor 
interpersonal dynamics to the point of distortion (Bernard and Goodyear, 1992). As a result, 
they do not suggest IPR as the exclusive method of supervision. It is  beneficial when 
combined with other supervisory techniques. IPR gives counsellors the chance to face their 
interpersonal fears, comprehend intricate counsellor/client dynamics, and make the most of 
their client interactions (Kagan, 1980). 
4.3.4 Integrative and Eclectic Counselling 
In Integrative and eclectic counselling and psychotherapy, (Palmer and Woolfe, 1999), the 
authors make a clear distinction between integrative and eclectic approaches: “Integration 
150 
 
suggests that the elements are part of one combined approach to theory and practice, as 
opposed to eclecticism which draws ad hoc from several approaches in the approach to a 
particular case.” The eclectic counsellors do not let themselves be bound by the dogma, or 
standard practices of psychotherapy. Instead, they chart their own path and use the method 
that seem to be the best possible for a particular client. They fuse together various schools of 
psychological theories and come up with a unique one. Besides this, there are different 
aspects to integrative psychotherapy: 
 · Common factors approach: This approach attempts to establish the connection 
between the core ideas of different theories and thus find the commonality among them.  
 · Technical eclecticism: This approach tries to isolate the best possible therapy 
method for a particular problem by studying data on what has worked best in the past for a 
similar problem. This helps to demonstrate how a certain theory has helped in a specific case 
and can then be re-applied in some part in another case. 
 · Theoretical integration: In this approach, two or more therapy methods are 
merged in the hope that they will give better results than when used individually. A well -
known example of such integration is Anthony Ryle’s (2005) model of Cognitive Analytic 
Therapy, which integrates the psychoanalytic object -relations theory and cognitive 
psychotherapy. 
 · Assimilative integration: This theory is based on the recognized fact that most 
counsellors choose a theoretical orientation as the foundation and, based on prior experience, 
integrate methods and strategies from other orientations into the therapy they provide to a 
client. 
An integrative approach to counseling and psychotherapy is best characterized by attempts to 
look beyond and across the confines of single -school approaches in order to see what can be 
learned from, and how clients can benefit from, other perspectives (Arkowitz, 1997). Since 
all human beings are different and come from different backgrounds, it is not fair to try to 
apply the same theories to all of them and forcefully fit their experiences into the paradigms 
of one particular theory.  
To avoid such gross generalization, Arnold Lazarus came up with the multimodal theory. The 
multimodal orientation begins with the supposition that therapy must appraise seven discrete 
but interactive modalities (abbreviated by the acronym BASIC ID, which stands for 
Behaviour, Affect, Sensation, Imagery, Cognition, Interpersonal factors, and Drug/Biological 
considerations). This psycho -educational framework encourages therapists to improvise and 
tailor therapy to the client. This theory establishes the usefulness of systematic or technical 
eclecticism. As per Lazarus, it is dangerous to blend bits and pieces of different theories, as 
eclectics do. He believed that this selective mixing will only serve to further complicate 
matters. So, he maintained that a practitioner should remain consistent theoretically but vary 
in the technical approach towards various patients. The eclecticism, for Lazarus, was better 
left in the technical part of counselling, rather than the theoretical part. Lazarus’s theory has 
proved especially useful when looked at from the perspective of the different cultures that 
exist in the world. All theories do not fit into the context of all cultures, and a practitioner 
who claims to be ‘eclectic’ needs to be well -versed in various theories and use them 
selectively, as per the cultural and other case-specific requirements of a client.  
151 
 
 
Lazarus also warns that blending theories is in fact, trickier than employing diverse 
techniques advocated by various schools of thought. The counsellors who try to fit diverse 
theoretical orientations into their own unique integrative model will first need to determine if 
the various theories are even compatible with each other. This in fact, is the basis for 
systematic eclecticism. It tries to establish the basic connection among the core ideas of the 
various theories being considered.  
Human beings themselves are integrated creatures, a mass of contradictions, ideas, notions 
and beliefs. Only that counselling can prove effective for them which allows them to combine 
their cognitive, affective and behavioural aspects. Such a counselling experience would 
allow: 
 · To think about ideas and assumptions 
 · To feel the struggles and conflicts 
 · To act in new ways in their daily lives in order to transform their behaviours 
As per Arnold Lazarus, a counselor armed with the database of multiple theories, will need to 
ask himself or herself the question at all times: What is the key requirement of this person in 
order to suffer less, and to cope, heal and grow more effectively in the process? 
The main disadvantage of the integrative approach is that if a counselor is unable to detach 
from preconceived notions and personal prejudices, he or she will rationalize the choice of 
theory whether it makes sense or not and this may end up being damaging for the client.  
Check Your Progress 
 4. State any four effects of person-centred counselling on clients.  
5. When was Carkhuff’s book, Toward Effective Counselling and Psychotherapy, 
published?  
 6. What is the main disadvantage of the integrative approach?  
 
4.4 Indian Models of Counselling 
Modern India conjures the thoughts of a thriving technology sector and an economy 
that is expanding at an unheard of rate. Significant societal change has resulted from 
economic progress. The necessity for counselling in modern day India arises from a social, 
cultural, and economic attitude that has never before existed in this nation. Traditional Indian 
healing focuses on the individual as a whole. This would encompass not only the person’s 
physical form but also the person’s thinking, feelings, beliefs, spiritual preferences, 
employment position, and all other facets of his or her existence. It would also cover the 
nature of the person’s connections with society and the ties that bind them. Ayurveda, an 
ancient form of traditional Indian medicine, describes in depth how emotions are connected 
to physical ailments and how maintaining the right balance between one’s own needs and 
those of their social connections is the key to good health (Das, 1974). An approach to 
counselling that separates the individual from the family and the mind from the body will 
probably fall short of meeting the perceived need in the Indian context.  
 
152 
 
Determinism 
Karma and Samsara, two philosophical concepts, are frequently characterised as having a 
fatalistic outlook on life. The idea that past deeds determine the present may inspire a feeling 
of inevitability. Free will is not contradicted by the concepts of Karma and Samsara. The 
current effort has a direct impact on future growth and success. Therefore, how one lives their 
current life may have an impact on how their future lives turn out. This focus on personal 
accountability is a helpful cue for counselling strategies that lean on the client’s cultural 
readiness.  
Self-Observation 
The major questions about self-observation are: 
· Why should we be talking about something that is self -oriented when 
everyone is talking about inclusive prosperity?  
· What drives us to put our attention on ourselves when there is so much to be 
done for the overall development of humanity?  
 · Isn’t that acting selfishly?  
That seems to contradict the theory of human evolution. Actually, not quite; before ever 
considering the evolution of humans, one needs to think about their own evolution. Every 
single human being must contribute to collective evolution. However, this large -scale 
evolution wouldn’t be conceivable until there is a conscious effort put for micro evolution. 
Micro evolution, here, translates to self -evolution. Observing oneself involves more than just 
looking inward; it also entails becoming aware of oneself by focusing on oneself and working 
toward growth.  
Another well-known online dictionary defines ’Self -Observation’ as the study of one’s own 
feelings or ideas. Their definitions are accurate, and that is where this conversation begins. As 
you might have guessed, the questions that form the basis of this conversation start with the 
query, ‘What is Self-observation?’ A second question follows, and then there are some more. 
There are more questions that surfaces as answers to these questions, just like an onion, 
where there is a whole other layer of onion inside as we peel back the outer layer. 
Every person has a secret universe of thoughts, feelings, and interior moods that is mainly 
unknown to them. These internal states —which influence decisions, inspire behaviours, and 
mould life experiences —come from the subconscious. But they are hardly ever noticed or 
consciously understood. One can perceive and comprehend these inner states through self -
observation. Everyone has this innate ability, which can be increased and expanded with 
effort. One can learn about the inner workings of the mind and delve into the dark recesses of 
our psychology by using this straightforward yet effective technique. One’s interactions with 
life can change drastically because of learning more about oneself and others. Self -
observation is the cornerstone of effective inner transformation that yields great wisdom, 
understanding, and calm. There are several techniques for self-observation.  
 
 
153 
 
4.4.1 Role of Detachment in Indian Counselling  
Leading dictionaries define detachment as: 
 · The act or process of disconnecting or detaching; separation. 
 · The state of being separate or detached. 
 · Indifference to or remoteness from the concerns of others; aloofness 
 · Indifference to worldly concerns 
 · Absence of prejudice or bias; disinterest 
Detachment has been extensively discussed in ancient Indian texts including the Vedas and 
Upanishads. One of the basic concepts of detachment is discussed in Bhagavad Gita. In 
ancient Indian language, Sanskrit, the detachment means Vairagya. The Sanskrit term, 
Vairagya, which was used in ancient Indian philosophy, means ‘renunciation,’ ‘detachment,’ 
or ‘dispassion’, especially in the sense of renunciation from the pleasures and pains of the 
corporeal world. Hindu sages who promoted vairagya advised their followers that doing so is 
a way to reach moksha (salvation). 
The word Vairagya is derived from the word viraga, which is formed by merging the words 
‘vi’, which means ‘without’ and ‘raga’, which means ‘passion, feeling, emotion, interest’. 
With regard to things that most people would become attached to, this lends the term 
‘Vairagya’ its general connotation of ‘ascetic disinterest’. This way of thinking about life is 
‘dis-passionate’. A Vairâgika is an ascetic who has mastery over all passions and desires. The 
root ‘rañj’, which denotes colour, is further defined by etymology as follows: Vi – rañj + 
ghaiK = virága. Vaerágya is the virága state. Virága meaning ‘to go beyond colour’ or ‘to be 
uncoloured’. Vaerágya is the state of being fully present in the world but unaffected by it. A 
Vairagi is someone who practises Vairagya. 
The Patañjali’s Yoga Sûtras contain the idea of Vairâgya, which, with practice, is the key to 
controlling the mind’s fluctuations. The Bhagavad Gita uses the term Vairâgya three times 
and recommends it as a crucial technique for calming the racing mind. Additionally, it is the 
main focus of Mokcopâya or Yoga-Vâsicmha. Without attachment, we are liberated from this 
point of view of a wandering mind where the mind automatically goes to areas it has 
developed a habit of going to in the past. Non -attachment entails apathy for the outside 
world. The ultimate objective of enlightenment is one that necessitates self -sacrifice; it is a 
challenging undertaking and the state is very tough to accomplish with death being the final 
test; this emphasises detachment. The bodisatva is one who controls their senses, giving up 
all attraction and aversion, and setting aside the sounds and sights that might otherwise lead 
to attachment in their sense organs. 
Along with non -violence, detachment is one of Jainism’s highest ideals. One of the 
Mahavratas, the five main vows kept by Jain monks, is non -possession/non-attachment. 
Detachment has value if it is combined with the understanding that a person is a soul, and it 
can also be a technique of achieving self -realisation. According to Jain saint Shrimad 
Rajchandra, detachment and other qualities are necessary for achieving self -realization for 
lifeless ritualists; simple physical constraint is ineffective in this regard. He advises that one 
154 
 
should engage in such things but not become trapped in them. Without self -realization, the 
fundamental cause of birth and death cannot be eradicated. 
Arjuna is instructed by Krishna to behave with detachment, which entails taking the right 
action regardless of whether it succeeds or fails. Krishna advises Arjuna to keep trying to do 
his best because that is what destiny requires of him to do. His destiny is his continued good 
performance of his role. The detachment is in not being moved by the emotions connected to 
living with continued awareness of success and failure because both are irrelevant. Treating 
joy and sorrow equally, gain and loss equally, and success and victory equally. Treating these 
agitating, painful, or upsetting dichotomies equally may be considered detachment. Arjuna 
must perform his task without fear of harm or loss by being detached from the results of his 
deeds. Arjuna is advised that if he battles with composure and views all possible outcomes as 
equal, he will not amass negative karma. If one sacrifices their own interests and works solely 
to carry out their responsibility towards the Supreme Being, they are freed from any karmic 
repercussions. 
Detachment can take many different forms, but it is obvious that it can be destructive if used 
incorrectly. Krishna appears to advise detachment in the form of three broad categories in 
Chapter 12 of the Bhagavad-Gita: 
· A lack of attachment to material possessions, as evidenced by his statement that the 
ideal bhakta is someone ’who has nothing of his own.’ 
· A lack of concern for the results of our deeds, as seen by allusions to the ideal devotee 
as someone who ‘is the same in praise and blame’ and ‘does not care if good comes or ill.’ 
· The ability to remain emotionally detached, as seen by his description of the ideal 
bhakta as being ‘even-minded in suffering and joy.’ 
The issue is that when any of these three categories are taken too far, they can provide 
negative insights rather than ones that elevate us. 
· If the objective is to entirely free us from material wants, then the question arises: Are 
material possessions not essential to life?  
· Why should we maintain our ties to food, clothing, or shelter in this situation?  
· This may eventually give rise to the notion that the body is likewise material in a 
sense, then why must we stay linked to it or live?  
· It is feasible to believe that we can be separated from any motivation for acting if we 
choose not to be linked to the results of our activities. 
· Why bother doing good work, if it doesn’t really matter what comes from the work 
that we do?  
· If intense emotional response is bad, why bother caring about anyone? 
Such thoughts can be harmful, so it’s perhaps better to consider them from the other 
perspective and consider how detachment benefits us in daily life. Detachment is nothing 
more than attachment to something higher, whether that something ‘higher’ be God, an ideal 
trait we desire to adopt into our lives, or a goal we have, according to one point of view. We 
155 
 
can turn such queries into something constructive if we believe that detachment is something 
that will benefit us in this life: 
· It’s possible that being detached from material possessions means we shouldn’t be 
emotionally invested in this body, but that’s only because doing so entails being committed to 
something ephemeral. This doesn’t imply that we should despise our bodies or the concept of 
life, rather, it might imply that we should use our fleeting bodies as tools to pursue higher 
ideals, such as selfless service. In order to avoid becoming emotionally connected to things 
that are not ours, we should utilise our lives as an opportunity to help others and improve the 
world as much as we can. 
· Labour without attachment is considerably different from work without purpose. 
Therefore, perhaps it is more crucial to keep working for the greater good rather than being 
concerned with the meaning and effects of our labours. At the same time, we should 
acknowledge that working is all we can do because there is no practical way to influence how 
everything we do turns out. 
How can we afford to be careless? This seems to be a fairly difficult question. According to 
psychology, emotional reaction is a significant component of what makes us human and 
affects how we respond to social circumstances and make decisions. It is challenging, if not 
impossible, to survive without any emotions. The root cause of the issue is over -emotion. 
Simply establishing the boundary between proper and excessive emotion is the difficult part. 
Does detachment actually mean renunciation; renouncing all the worldly pleasures? We 
should be totally committed to achieving higher objectives while being detached enough to 
avoid becoming too frustrated by failure or overconfidence as a result of success. Detachment 
resembles attachment to a higher goal in this sense. Krishna teaches Arjuna the way to 
resolve the dilemma of renunciation and action. Freedom lies, not in the renunciation of the 
world, but in disciplined action (Karma Yoga). Put concretely, all actions are to be performed 
without attachment to the fruits of the action while being dedicated in loving devotion to 
Krishna. Disciplined action within the context of devotion is essential to the religious life 
envisioned in the Gita. If we choose to forgo our own interests, renunciation appears to be a 
preferable course. We relinquish the good and bad of the earthly world by renunciation. Our 
souls are ultimately cleansed because of this. A cleansed soul is pure. Therefore, we are also 
clean. All of this is accomplished without confronting the means -ends relationship or the 
contradiction of disinterested conduct. Undoubtedly, this purifying technique may be more 
challenging than Karma Yoga.  
Rejecting love, relationships, joys, suffering, and attachment calls for an almost limitless 
mental fortitude and iron will. Any advantages of renunciation will be outweighed by the 
wisdom gained by actively pursuing selfless conduct. This approach confronts a challenge 
head-on rather than ducking and diving. The teachings of Sri Aurobindo follow a similar 
pattern. Yoga and meditation have historically been seen as tools for renunciation in India, 
but according to him, these practises equip us to be present in life rather than serve as a 
means of avoiding it. Unfortunately, a lot of individuals believe incorrectly that devotion and 
attachment are synonyms. When we are in the finite and connected to the finite, it is when we 
are attached. When we devote ourselves to the Infinite and are set free by the Infinite, we are 
said to be dedicated. It’s wrong to be detached. We believe that someone is indifferent if they 
are disconnected.  
156 
 
The same error is made by spiritual seekers who believe that in order to be detached from 
someone, we must treat him/her with complete indifference and disregard. That is untrue. 
When we don’t care about someone, we don’t do anything for him/her. We are not involved 
in his happiness or sadness, success or failure. But when we are genuinely disengaged, we 
give all of ourselves to serving that person. Whether the outcome is success or failure is 
irrelevant. If we are not at anyway dependent on the outcomes, our consciousness 
immediately expands. If we don’t care about the results of our actions, the Supreme will 
reward us in the way that the Supreme chooses. ‘Thou hast the right to act, but not to the 
fruits of doing,’ remarked Lord Krishna. Action does not bound us if we work diligently and 
selflessly. If we labour without thinking about the outcome, working for God’s sake won’t be 
difficult. True detachment, or spiritual detachment, is what this is.  
4.4.2 Role of Self-Surrender in Indian Counselling  
Self-surrender is nothing more than a condition of complete detachment from oneself and 
submission to the will of the God. A continual occurrence of this situation triggers the 
development of negation. We start to draw a steady stream of the highest divine force from 
the great God when we give ourselves over to Him. A man only thinks or acts in accordance 
with his God’s wishes when in this state. He perceives nothing in the world as being his 
property, but rather, everything as a holy trust from the God, and he acts in accordance with 
this perception. His will becomes wholly obedient to the God’s will. 
It stops the mind’s oscillations and puts us to a stationary state. Over time, we start to feel as 
though we are being driven away from everything else by a powerful force. We stop engaging 
in undesired behaviours and constantly focus on ensuring that our organs are operating 
properly (the indriyas). Bharata, the son of Dasharatha, set a lovely example of surrender 
when he went to the forest with the residents of Ayodhya in an effort to persuade his brother 
Rama to come back. Rama seriously retorted that if Bharata requested him to, he would be 
more than happy to go back to the capital in response to their pleas. All eyes were on Bharata, 
who was present to persuade him to come back. ‘It is not for me to command, but merely to 
follow’, he calmly retorted.  
The idea of submission is discussed in the Bhagavad Gita as well. It is uncommon to achieve 
something easily. After utterly negating all sensations and faculties, we move forward 
according to the fundamental rules of dedication. This idea of Indian self -surrender can be 
used in counselling in order to help clients surrender to the circumstances in life which is not 
under their control. It seems that we as humans have such high rates of anxiety and sadness 
due to us spending all our time attempting to fit ourselves into a distorted societal reality. We 
are raised in households that implicitly want us to fit in, and as a result, we are socialised to 
do so. Then, as extra conditioning, we attend schools where we are expected to sit quietly and 
learn in a very linear fashion. Additionally, we might have been brought up in a religion that 
forbids us from sharing our radical viewpoints with others to fit in. Such radical people are 
shamed and humiliated if they publically express their ideas. Additionally, there are unwritten 
guidelines or things we must do to appease the other person (or people) in our personal 
relationships. The idea of ‘just be yourself’ seems ironic, when seen in the context of so many 
rules and structures put in place from early in life. What is the answer in this case? Do we 
have to battle thoughts, emotions, and relationships all the way to the grave?  
157 
 
 
Some difficulty is inevitable and even worthwhile to engage with, but that by practising 
surrender, we can also bring in greater ease. When you surrender, you stop fighting life and 
start accepting it. It’s not that you’re giving up, abdicating your duty, allowing others to 
control you, or abdicating your power. It’s very different from that. Fundamentally, giving 
yourself over to something else generates space. This is the essence of yielding or 
surrendering. It involves letting something other than your own concerns and feelings fill you 
up. However, it’s not necessarily for the best when that ‘something else’ is involving you to 
greater degree. For instance, take addiction as an example. People with addictions give in to 
their preferred substances, whether it’s food, relationships/love/sex, video games, etc., and 
are subsequently controlled by it. It is something over which they have no control. Addiction 
is compelled by a desperate need to have whatever it is in order to feel better, numb, or to 
otherwise escape the person’s current emotional reality. 
Dr. Marion Woodman quoted as saying: ‘Having a body that is like a musical instrument, 
open enough to be able to resonate, literally resonate with what is coming both from the 
inside and from the outside, so that one is able to surrender to powers greater than oneself.’ 
So how can you perform this nebulous act of submission/surrender? You must soften your 
mind, body, and soul in order to surrender and to relax into whatever the situation is.  
Although it can also be an exterior act, it is very much an interior shift. The physical act 
might serve as a metaphor for intensifying the shift occurring internally. 
Check Your Progress 
 7. Which two concepts in India have a fatalistic outlook on life?  
 8. How does Bharata set the best example of self-surrender?  
 
4.5 Modern Trends in Counselling 
In the ancient times, the form of counselling was informal and unorganized. Gradually, with 
an increase in complications in the society, it was felt that the process of counselling should 
be made scientific, well-organized and formal so that this can be utilized well and properly. In 
the recent times, the form of counselling has developed much, and different types of 
counselling have come into being for the solution of different types of problems in life. There 
are different approaches to counselling as we have already discussed. However nowadays 
these approaches are being merged and used according to the particular of the situation client. 
Counselling can be divided into following parts on the basis of their aim or scope: 
· Psychological counselling: Under psychological counselling, an individual suffering 
from a mental disorder is treated. A counsellor assists a counsellee by general dialogue to 
express his suppressed desires, emotions and sensations. Besides, he also gives him necessary 
suggestions and information. 
· Psychopathological counselling: Psychopathology is the scientific study of mental 
disorders, including efforts to understand their genetic, biological, psychological, and social 
causes; effective classification schemes; course across all stages of development; 
manifestations; and treatment. The term may also refer to the manifestation of behaviours that 
indicate the presence of a mental disorder. This also uses dialogue as the tool, and the 
158 
 
methods of hypnotism, psycho -drama, etc., are used. It comprises of the serious problems of 
maladjustment. 
· Diagnostic counselling: Under diagnostic counselling, a problem is analysed and then 
diagnosed. When a counsellee developed any improper behaviour in the adjustment or order 
of self-expression, he is treated with the help of behavioural psychology. 
· Marital counselling: Under this counselling, an individual is given suitable 
suggestions about the selection of his life partner and adjustment with him/her. The 
increasing number of divorces and broken families necessitates the setting up of a large 
number of marital counselling agencies/centres. 
· V ocational counselling: V ocational counselling helps an individual in selecting a 
vocation of his choice. Under this type of counselling, different types of data are gathered 
about an individual before he is counseled.  
· Student counselling: Student counselling is related to the common problems that are 
faced by the students. Different types of information are provided to the students regarding 
the selection of teaching institutions and curriculum, so that they can analyse the given 
information and take a decision accordingly. 
· Transfer counselling: Transfer counselling is given in the selection of a suitable 
vocation keeping in view the interest, ability, capability and outlook of a counsellee. 
The chief classification of counselling is based on its form. On the basis of form, the 
following types of counselling are in trend: 
· Directive counselling: Directive counselling gives complete importance to the 
counsellor. 
· Non-directive counselling: Non -directive counselling gives more importance to the 
counsellor. 
· Eclectic counselling: Eclectic counselling gives equal importance to both counsellor 
and counsellee. 
4.5.1 Directive Counselling 
Directive counselling is counsellor centred. A counsellor keeps his attention on the problem 
and establishes the relationship of friendship and cooperation with the counsellee and 
expresses his opinions freely. He evaluates the expressions of the counsellee and arranges an 
interview. He prepares a brief -answer questionnaire in the interview. He does not permit the 
development of his emotions and expressions, but renders counselling after self-observation. 
E.G. Williamson was an important supporter of this method. According to him, a counsellor 
considers himself responsible for the problem -solving of the counsellee. He investigates and 
explores the problem, defines it, diagnoses it and tries to eliminate it. 
Willy and Andrew, in their book Modern Methods and Techniques in Guidance, have 
mentioned the following approved estimates of directive counselling: 
· A counsellor is more able, skilled, trained and experienced; therefore he can give a 
better solution to a problem. 
159 
 
· Counselling is an intellectual process. The intellectual ability of a counsellee is not 
destroyed due to his maladjustment; therefore a counsellor lays emphasis on his emotional 
aspect as well as intellectual aspect. 
· The evaluation of the aims of counselling is determined from the situation of 
problem-solving. 
· A counsellee is not capable of problem -solving. He can solve his problems with the 
help of a counsellor. 
According to Williamson, the norms of counseling are as follows: 
· The aim of counselling is to affect the all -round development of a counsellee in order 
to assist him. 
· Counselling is based on an individual’s own desire and not on pressure. 
· The facility of counseling should be provided only when a student is faced with a 
problem and is unable to solve it himself. From this view, counseling is diagnostic. 
· The mutual relations in counseling are neutral. 
· Counselling lays special emphasis on self-approval in the context of a problem. 
· The counsellor respects the dignity of a counsellee. 
Thus, in Williamson point of view, a counsellor is like a teacher who enables an individual to 
understand his capabilities, attitudes, interests, motivations and lifestyle. 
Steps of directive counselling 
Williamson has mentioned the following six steps of directive counselling: 
 1. Analysis: Under analysis, reliable data are gathered from different reliable 
sources. These sources are cumulative records, interview, time division form, biography, 
amended article, psychological tests, etc. In some cases, case history is also used, by which 
data regarding family history, recreation, interests, etc., are found out. 
 2. Synthesis: Under this step, the compiled data is presented in an orderly, 
systematic and brief manner so that the qualities, limitations, adjustments and maladjustments 
of the counsellee can be found out. 
 3. Diagnosis: Under diagnosis, the factors responsible for the problem and its 
nature are found out and a student’s abilities and limitations are estimated. The three 
components of diagnosis are as follows: 
 (i) Introduction to problem 
 (ii) Exploration of cause 
 (iii) Prognosis 
 4. Prognosis: When prognosis of a problem’s outcome is estimated, then it is a 
part of the diagnosis, but under other situations it is an independent step. 
160 
 
 5. Counselling or treatment: Under this step, a counsellor counsels a counsellee 
on the basis of analysis. He removes his doubts and treats him accordingly. 
 6. Follow-up: Under this final step, the effect of counseling is evaluated.  
Characteristics of directive counselling 
The main characteristics of directive counselling are as follows: 
 · A counsellor is prominent in directive counselling. 
 · He suggests or counsels a counsellee. 
 · The problem is the focal point of the counselling, and not the counsellee. 
· In directive counselling, a counsellee is under a counsellor, and is not equal to 
him. 
· At the time of counselling, the directive method, lecture method, and 
analytical method is employed. 
· At the time of counselling, a counsellor lays more emphasis on his intellectual 
aspect than emotional aspect. 
Limitations of directive counselling 
There are some limitations to directive counselling too, due to which the process of ideal 
counselling can be obstructed. These limitations are as follows: 
· In this process, a counsellee becomes dependent on a counsellor and he is not 
able to solve the new problems of maladjustments. 
· In directive counselling, the experiences and aptitudes of a counsellee are 
absent. 
 · A counsellor is not able to awake a counsellee towards the errors in the future. 
· There is a possibility of giving wrong counselling due to the compilation of 
insufficient data. 
Advantages of directive counselling 
This type of counselling is beneficial in many ways. The advantages of directive counselling 
are as follows: 
 · This method is useful due to its limited time. It saves a lot of time. 
· In this counselling, more emphasis is laid on the problem and less on the 
counsellee, and this is justified in many ways. 
 · A counsellor can look at the counsellee directly. 
· In this, more attention is given to the intellectual aspect as compared to the 
emotional aspect, which assists in the rational solution of a problem. 
· In this process, a counsellor is readily available for assistance and a counselee 
is much contended and assured. 
161 
 
4.5.2 Non-Directive Counselling 
Non-directive counselling is counsellee -oriented. Its proponent is Carl R. Rogers. According 
to his opinion, an individual is prominent and not his problem; so the activities of a 
counsellor are not as important; rather it is his function to create such an environment in 
which a counsellee can act independently and determine his path himself. In this process, the 
emotional aspect of a counsellee is emphasized.  
No doubt, the counsellee-centred process revolves round a counsellee. In this, a counsellee is 
encouraged to converse, express his opinion, thoughts and attitudes, etc. Generally, a 
counsellor is passive and he does not obstruct the expression of a counsellee.  In this type of 
counselling, past data are not compiled about a counsellee, nor are conducted any types of 
tests. Only he is encouraged to speak up. He is fully free. 
Basic assumptions of non-directive counselling 
The basic assumptions are: 
· Trust in man’s dignity: Rogers has faith in an individual’s dignity. He thinks 
that an individual is capable of taking his decisions himself and he knows what he 
should do. 
· Emphasis on emotions and passions: In non -directive counselling, more 
emphasis is laid on the emotional aspect than on intellectual aspect. A counsellee is 
given numerous opportunities to express his emotions himself freely. It brings out his 
emotions and attitudes, and a problem is solved on the basis of this information. 
· Trust in the goodness of man: According to Rogers, an individual is basically 
good and reliable. Sometimes, under adverse circumstances, he behaves himself 
improperly and elimination this problem requires the all -round development of 
personality. 
· Proper environment: In this process, a counsellor is not a director or referee. 
His real work is limited to the creation of a suitable environment in which a 
counsellee takes his decision himself. He does not hold a counsellor responsible for 
the decision, rather he becomes able to understand himself better. 
William Snider has mentioned the following fundamental characteristics of non -
directive counselling: 
 · A counsellor is free to choose the objective of his life. 
· If a counsellee is given an opportunity, he would select those objectives which 
makes him happy. 
· Through this counselling, a counsellee becomes able to take decisions in a 
limited time. 
· Emotional conflict is the strongest obstacle in the proper adjustment of an 
individual. 
 
162 
 
Steps in non-directive counselling 
Carl Rogers has mentioned the following steps in non-directive counselling: 
· Define the problem situation: A counsellor at first defines those situations 
which create a problem. 
· Express emotions freely: In the second step, a counsellor creates such an 
environment in which a counsellee can express his emotions freely. 
· To classify positive and negative emotions: Under this step, a counsellor 
classifies the emotions of a counsellee under positive and negative types. 
· To develop insight: As a counsellee starts to have self-realization, a counsellor 
keeps explaining his emotions so that a counsellee can develop proper insight. 
· To give up counselling situation: In the end, after the objective of counselling 
is achieved, the counselling situation is given up, and this step can be taken by 
any of the counsellor or counselee. 
Characteristics of non-directive counselling 
The important characteristics of non-directive counselling are as follows: 
 · Non-directive counselling is a counselee cantered process. 
· This is based on the principle that an individual has so many abilities and he 
can develop them so as to be able to face any situation. 
 · A counsellor remains passive in non-directive counselling. 
· An individual is accepted in his originality and he is free to express any of his 
emotions. 
 · This type of counselling improves upon psychological adjustment. 
 · This eliminates mental tensions. 
 · This type of counselling functions in a reactionary manner. 
· This brings the picture drawn by a counselee and a desired ideal picture 
together. 
 · A counselee becomes emotionally mature. 
· The main objective of the non -directive counselling is to cultivate self -
confidence in an individual. 
 · Sometimes, directive counselling too has to resort to this method. 
 · In this type of counselling, the whole responsibility lies with the counselee. 
 · In this counselling, no diagnostic tool or test is used. 
· In this type of counselling, it is necessary to assimilate the factors of reality, 
sensitivity and naturalness. 
163 
 
Limitations of non-directive counselling  
The limitations of non-directive counselling are as follows: 
 · This type of counselling is not as intensive as psychoanalysis. 
· This gives freedom to a counsellee to express his attitudes and emotions 
freely, but the emotions are not analyzed; these are neither refined nor tested. 
· A major limitation of this type of counselling is that a counsellor’s role is not 
flexible. 
 · This type of counselling cannot be utilized in institutions, such as school. 
· This is a time-consuming process and a counsellor gets to speak very less, i.e., 
his role is limited. 
· A counsellee cannot fully depend on his own decision and intellectual ability, 
he often requires others’ counselling and decisions for problem solving. 
· Due to passivity of a counsellor, a counsellee is sometimes hesitant to speak 
out freely. 
Advantages of non-directive counselling  
There are certain advantages of non-directive counselling. They are as follows: 
 · Under this method, a counsellee develops the ability to solve his problems. 
 · It emancipates from many undesirable tests and techniques. 
· In this method, several things in the subconscious can be brought out into the 
conscious mind. 
 · This type of counselling has its long lasting effect. 
Thus, it is evident that non-directive counselling has certain advantages and at many times, an 
individual is able to solve his problems by giving vent to his emotions. 
4.5.3 Eclectic Counselling 
We have already discussed this to some extent as one of the models of counselling. Here, we 
will look at it in depth. The combination of directive and non-directive counselling depending 
upon the situational factors is known as eclectic counselling. In this type of counselling, a 
counsellor is neither fully active nor fully passive; rather he studies different aspects of a 
counsellee’s personality and selects certain useful techniques for him.  
Under this method, a counsellor can begin his work from the directive method and then can 
start to use the non -directive method keeping in with the time and place. In this, counsellor 
and counsellee are active and find the solution together. The major techniques in this type of 
counselling are compilation of data, assurance, case history, examination, etc. 
 
 
164 
 
 
Steps in eclectic counselling 
The steps through which the process of eclectic counselling passes is as follows: 
· Study of need of counselling and personality: In the first step, a counsellor 
locates the primary need of counselling and compiles relevant data regarding 
his personality traits. 
· Selection of techniques: Under this step, a counsellor selects the techniques, 
keeping in mind the needs of counselling and uses them accordingly. 
· Use of techniques: The selected techniques are utilized only under specific 
circumstances. Not only this, the utility of the techniques is determined on the 
basis of desire and need of the counsellee. 
· Evaluation of the effect: Under this step, the techniques used so far are 
evaluated to know their effect. 
· Preparation for counselling: In this step, due preparation is made for giving 
counselling and guidance to a counsellee. 
· To get advice from the counsellee and related individuals: Under the final step, 
the advice is sought from the counsellee and other related individuals 
regarding the topics of its programmes and other aims. 
Characteristics of eclectic counselling 
F. C. Thorne has mentioned the following characteristics of eclectic counselling: 
 · In this type of counselling, objectives and integrative methods are used. 
· In the beginning of the counselling, the role of the counsellee is active and the 
counsellor is passive, and for this, suitable techniques are used. 
 · The principle of frugality is adhered in this method. 
· In this type of counselling, it is necessary for a counsellor to have desired skill 
and professional efficiency in the use of required methods and techniques. 
· Keeping the need of counsellee in view, it is decided whether directive or non-
directive method should be used. 
· Emphasis is laid on begetting favourable opportunities to the counsellee by 
which he can find a solution to the problems himself. 
Limitations to eclectic counselling 
The limitations of eclectic counselling are as follows: 
· Eclectic counselling has no set of rules, as it is not clearly defined by the 
scholars, which makes this type of counselling unclear.  
· It is very difficult to present a synthesized form of directive and non -directive 
counselling, because these two are like poles apart. 
165 
 
· There is no definite rule as to how much freedom should be given to a 
counsellee.  
Despite this argument, the practical importance of eclectic counselling is much and it can 
help to get useful results in less time. Eclectic counselling is practical, while being a learning 
process, in which both counsellor and counsellee get to learn something. 
The difference between these two can be understood easily: 
 
 Directive Counseling Non-Directive Counselling 
1. No person is able to study himself, 
so he requires the services of a 
counsellor. 
An individual has numerous abilities to 
develop, but he is not aware of them 
many times. 
2. It makes counselling possible in a 
limited time. 
This requires comparatively more time. 
3. More importance is attached to 
intellectual aspect. 
This lays emphasis on emotional and 
affective aspect. 
4. This is problem centered. This is counsellee centered. 
5. This necessitates study of the past, 
so case history is used. 
This attaches importance to the present 
and proximal problems. 
6. Intellectual selection is done, 
keeping the future in view. 
Advice, suggestion and non-directive 
activities are important and self-
realization is necessary. 
7 The importance is given to analysis. The importance is given to the synthesis. 
Table 4.2 Difference between Directive and Non-Directive Counselling 
4.5.4 Future of Counselling 
The following principles are the future directions for the profession of counselling. 
· The counselling profession shall present a clear definition of counselling to the 
public. 
· It shall promote optimum health and wellness for those served as the ultimate 
goal for counselling interventions. 
· The profession shall focus on a body of core knowledge and skills shared by 
all counsellors. 
 · It shall speak with a united voice at the state and federal levels. 
 · It shall have the highest respect for all counselling specialties. 
· Counsellor education programs shall reflect a philosophy that counselling is a 
single profession with specialized areas of training. 
· Counselling accrediting bodies shall reflect a philosophy that counselling is a 
single profession with specialized areas of training. 
166 
 
 
· The profession shall develop a fluid process allowing new specialties to 
emerge and existing specialties to evolve naturally and merge as 
developmentally appropriate. 
 · It shall develop an outreach/marketing process that reflects a shared  
identity. 
· The profession shall conduct ongoing outreach to ensure that the public 
understands who professional counsellors are, the credentials and skills they 
possess, and how their services are uniquely different. 
· Professional counselling organizations shall involve front -line practitioners at 
all policy and decision-making levels. 
· It shall speak with a united voice when educating the health care insurance 
industry and advocating for counselling, counsellors, or clients. 
· It shall offer ongoing education and training for counsellors to encourage 
client and student advocacy. 
· Professional counselling organizations shall collaborate to identify an 
advocacy project that would be completed annually within a selected 
community. 
· The counselling profession shall investigate and delineate the best 
organizational structure for the future of counselling. 
· It shall establish common preparation standards and a single training model to 
be used by all counsellor preparation programs. 
· It shall establish uniform licensing standards with LPC as an entry -level title 
for counsellor licensure. 
 · It shall create interest in research by practitioners and students. 
 · It shall emphasize both qualitative and quantitative outcome research. 
· Outcome research shall focus on delineating the counselling modalities that 
work best in different counselling settings and with particular counselling 
clients. 
 · Outcome research shall delineate best practices in counsellor preparation. 
· This profession shall encourage evidenced -based, ethical practices as the 
foundation for counsellors -in-training, and for professional counsellor 
interventions across settings and populations served. 
· It shall work with undergraduate programs to educate students about graduate 
work in counselling. 
Check Your Progress 
 9. What is the difference between directive and non-directive counselling? 
 10. What are the limitations of eclectic counselling?  
167 
 
4.6 Answers to Check Your Progress Questions 
1. Credibility is an important consideration in choosing a counsellor. It implies 
two things:  
 a. Enhancing expertise by study and practice 
 b. Creating trust by maintaining integrity in relationships 
2. Reflexivity in counselling is to do with the ability to adapt to the mode of 
explanation of the client. As the client changes his or her ways of construing 
events, so too must the counsellor. The counsellor has to be involved in a 
reflexive process, seeking to make his or her own interpretation explicit by 
interaction with the client. 
3. George Kelly describes the cycle of change as a process of five stages, which 
are as follows: Anticipation; Commitment; Encounter; 
Confirmation/Disconfirmation; and Constructive revision. 
4. According to Rogers (1961), as a result of person -centred counselling clients 
should become: 
 a. More realistic in their self-perceptions. 
 b. More confident and self-directing. 
 c. More positively valued by themselves. 
 d. Less likely to repress aspects of their experiences. 
5. Carkhuff’s book, Toward Effective Counselling and Psychotherapy, was 
published in 1967. 
6. The main disadvantage of the integrative approach is that if a counsellor is 
unable to detach from preconceived notions and personal prejudices, he or she 
will rationalize the choice of theory whether it makes sense or not and this 
may end up being damaging for the client. 
7. Karma and Samsara, two philosophical concepts, are frequently characterised 
as having a fatalistic outlook on life. The idea that past deeds determine the 
present may inspire a feeling of inevitability. 
8. Bharata, the son of Dasharatha, set a lovely example of surrender when he 
went to the forest with the residents of Ayodhya in an effort to persuade his 
brother Rama to come back. Rama seriously retorted that if Bharata requested 
him to, he would be more than happy to go back to the capital in response to 
their pleas. All eyes were on Bharata, who was present to persuade him to 
come back. ‘It is not for me to command, but merely to follow’, he calmly 
retorted.  
9. Directive counselling gives complete importance to the counsellor, while non -
directive counselling gives more importance to the counsellor. 
 10. The limitations of eclectic counselling are as follows: 
168 
 
a. Eclectic counselling has no set of rules, as it is not clearly defined by the 
scholars, which makes this type of counselling unclear. 
b. It is very difficult to present a synthesized form of directive and non -directive 
counselling, because these two are like poles apart. 
c. There is no definite rule as to how much freedom should be given to a 
counselee. 
4.7 Summary 
• The relationship between the client and counsellor is certainly professional but 
it requires a human touch to be fruitful. A person-to-person relationship can be 
a basic foundation for an effective counselling process. 
• Counselling is a process of learning about the client’s situation and extending 
help. Each counselling instance is a case study to be added to the knowledge 
base and a source of new experience in learning. 
• Communication is at the core of counselling. A counsellor should be effective 
in oral and non -verbal communication. He or she should be good at speaking 
and listening. 
• A client may find it hard to continue talking and become silent. The role of the 
counsellor is to interpret the silence and if necessary break it. Some clients 
expect encouraging words of appreciation or inquiry to go on.  
• Inquiry need not be based on interrogative approaches. By stating the 
questions in an assertive or declaratory form, one can secure information. This 
is a mild and gentle form of inquiry. 
• Scanning is the process of scrutinizing the information relating to a particular 
problem area. It seeks to look in and look around to gather details about the 
problem. It presents a problems map. 
• Brainstorming is a creative thinking tool. It is an idea generation technique. It 
helps one think beyond existing options to experimental ideas that have not so 
far been considered infeasible or ruled out as unrealistic. 
• Without theoretical packing, counsellors’ operate haphazardly in a trial -and-
error manner and risk being both ineffective and harmful. 
• An effective counsellor decides which theory or theories and methods to use 
on the basis of educational background, philosophy and the needs of the 
clients. 
• Carl Rogers developed client -centred therapy as a reaction against what he 
considered the basic limitations of psychoanalysis. 
• According to Roger, there are certain attributes on the therapist’s part 
(genuineness, Non-possessive warmth and acceptance, and accurate empathy) 
169 
 
that constitute the necessary and sufficient conditions for therapeutic 
effectiveness to occur within the client. 
• Robert R. Carkhuff created the helping and human relationship theory to 
explain how people interact in the professional setting. 
• Attending entails starting the conversation. There is a greeting, an introduction 
of each party to the relationship, and an effort to make the client feel 
comfortable. 
• The nurse should start informing the client about the expected response and 
any available options once the interaction’s purpose has been established and 
the client has consented to it. The helper starts responding to the client. 
• The IPR model is described by the APA as a technique used to comprehend 
psychotherapy procedures and to train counsellors and therapists. 
• IPR offers supervisees a secure setting to explore internal reactions by reliving 
the client interaction through a process recall supervision session. 
• The eclectic counsellors do not let themselves be bound by the dogma, or 
standard practices of psychotherapy.  
• An integrative approach to counselling and psychotherapy is best 
characterized by attempts to look beyond and across the confines of single -
school approaches in order to see what can be learned from, and how clients 
can benefit from, other perspectives. 
• Karma and Samsara, two philosophical concepts, are frequently characterised 
as having a fatalistic outlook on life. The idea that past deeds determine the 
present may inspire a feeling of inevitability. 
• Rejecting love, relationships, joys, suffering, and attachment calls for an 
almost limitless mental fortitude and iron will. Any advantages of renunciation 
will be outweighed by the wisdom gained by actively pursuing selfless 
conduct. 
• Some difficulty is inevitable and even worthwhile to engage with, but that by 
practising surrender, we can also bring in greater ease. 
• Directive counselling is counsellor centred. A counsellor keeps his attention on 
the problem and establishes the relationship of friendship and cooperation with 
the counselee and expresses his opinions freely. 
• Non-directive counselling is counselee -oriented. Its proponent is Carl R. 
Rogers. According to his opinion, an individual is prominent and not his 
problem. 
• The combination of directive and non -directive counselling depending upon 
the situational factors is known as eclectic counselling. 
 
170 
 
4.8 Key Words 
• Probing: In psychotherapy, the use of direct questions intended to stimulate 
discussion in the hope of uncovering relevant information or helping the client 
come to a particular realization or achieve a particular insight. 
• Eclectic Counselling: The combination of directive and non -directive 
counselling depending upon the situational factors is known as eclectic 
counselling. 
4.9 Self-Assessment Questions and Exercises 
Short-Answer Questions 
1. Briefly explain the questioning technique as used in the case of probing in 
counselling. 
 2. Write a short note on components of the Carkhuff model of counselling skills. 
 3. What is the role of self-surrender? Briefly explain. 
 4. What do you think is the future direction of counselling? 
Long-Answer Questions 
 1. Explain the learning skills required by a counsellor. 
 2. Discuss the Rogers’ model of counselling in detail. 
 3. Describe the IPR model of counselling. 
 4. Evaluate the significance and working of directive counselling. 
4.10 Further Readings 
Corey, G. 2016. Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy.  United 
States: Cengage Learning. 
Boivin, M. and A. Meier. 2010. Counselling and Therapy Techniques: Theory and Practice. 
United Kingdom: SAGE Publications. 
Tinsley, Howard E. A.; Noelle S. Giffin Wiersma; and Suzanne H. Lease (Ed.). 2015. 
Contemporary Theory and Practice in Counseling and Psychotherapy.   United States: SAGE 
Publications. 
Reeves, A. 2012. An Introduction to Counselling and Psychotherapy: From Theory to 
Practice. United Kingdom: SAGE Publications. 
 
 
 
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University, Nashik      . 
Dnyangangotri Campus, Near Gangapur Dam, Nashik 422222 
Tel. No. (0253) 2231475, 2231714 
Website https://ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac    www.ycmou.ac.in 
 
School of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Feedback 
If you have any suggestions or feedback regarding the structure of the university's curriculum 
and its books, difficulty level, language style, subject analysis, self-study questions, please 
inform us at the following address or via the e-mail given below. 
Contact Address 
Director, School of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University, Dnyangangotri Campus, Near Gangapur 
Dam, Nashik- 422 222 
Email: psychology.shu@ycmou.ac.in or dir.shu@ycmou.ac.in 
 
(1) Full Name: ______________________________________________________________ 
 
(2) Full Address: ____________________________________________________________ 
 
(3) Mobile No: _______________________    Email: _______________________________ 
 
(4) Education: ___________________________   Designation:________________________ 
 
(5) Feedback/Suggestions: _____________________________________________________ 
 
__________________________________________________________________________  
 
(i) Syllabus Structure: _________________________________________________________ 
 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
 
(ii) Difficulty Level: __________________________________________________________ 
 
(iii) Language Style: __________________________________________________________ 
 
(iv) Topic Explanation: _______________________________________________________ 
(v) Other: __________________________________________________________________  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 

University Headquarter Address 
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University 
Dnyangangotri, Near Gangapur Dam, Govardhan, Nashik - 422 222 
(0253) 2230227, 2230459, 2230025, 2231714, 2231715 
           Regional Centres 
1. Amravati 
YCMOU Amravati Regional Center, VMV – Walgaon Road, Post V .M.V ., 
Amravati – 444 604 
Mobile: 9422247292, 9511797261 
Email ID: rd_amravati@ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac 
 
2. Chhatrapati Sambhaji Nagar (Aurangabad) 
YCMOU Chh. Sambhaji Nagar Regional Center, Survey No. 41, East of the Military 
boy's Hostel, Nandanvan Colony, Cantt. Post Office ,Chhavani,  
Aurangabad – 431 002 (Off) 0240-2371066, 2371077, 2371051 (Fax) 2371088Mobile: 
9422247293, 9403774784 
Email ID: rd_aurangabad@ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac 
 
3. Mumbai 
YCMOU Mumbai Regional Center,  C/o Jagannath Shankarsheth  Municipal School 
Building, 2nd floor, (Red coloured four storied building), Nana Chowk, Grant Road 
(West), Mumbai – 400 007 (Off) 022-23874180/23874183, 23874177, (Fax) 23874187 
Mobile: 9969013886,     
9403774551 Email ID: rd_mumbai@ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac 
 
4. Nagpur 
YCMOU Nagpur Regional Center, D. Laxminarayan Bunglow, Near Subhedar Hall,  
Law College Campus, Amrawati Road, Ravinagar, Nagpur – 440 001  
Phone No: Off: 0712 -2553724, (Fax) 2553725Mobile: 9422247295, 9403964532, 
9420485052 Email ID: rd_nagpur@ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac 
 
5. Nashik 
YCMOU Nashik Regional Center, 2nd Floor, Old Nashik Municipal Corporation 
Building 
New Pandit Colony, Nashik – 422 002 
Phone No: (Off) 0253 – 2317063, (Fax) 2576756, Mobile: 9422247297, 9403774744,  
8208365647 Email ID: rd_nashik@ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac 
 
6. Pune 
YCMOU Pune Regional Center,  C/o 654, 2nd Floor, Shahir Annabhau Sathe School 
Building, Municipal Boys’ School No. 5, Sadashiv Peth, Kumthekar Marg, Pune – 411 
030 
Phone No: (Off) 020 – 24457914, (Fax) 24491107, Mobile: 9422247298,    
9403961212, 9423979646 Email ID: rd_pune@ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac 
 
7. Kolhapur 
YCMOU Kolhapur Regional Center, Near Shivaji University Post Office, Vidyanagar, 
Kolhapur – 416 004 Phone No: (Off) 0231 – 2607022, (Fax) 2607023, Mobile: 
9422247294, 9423979645, 9423979750  
Email ID: rd_kolhapur@ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac 
 
8. Nanded 
YCMOU Nanded Regional Center, 
Swami Ramanand Tirth Marathwada University Campus 
Near Sports Building, Nanakwadi Kaman, Zari Road,  
Vishnupuri, Nanded – 421 606 
Mobile: 9422247296, 9403774571, 9403774643, 9403774582 
Email ID:  rd_nanded@ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac 
 
 
 
 
 
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University
'Dnyangangotri', Near Gangapur Dam, Gowardhan, Nashik - 422 222
Telephone : (0253) 2230227, 2230459, 2233698, 2230024-28
Website : https://ycmou.digitaluniversity.ac
  https://www.ycmou.ac.in